===== PAGE 1 =====

Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks
Thomas Lubinski,1, 2 Joshua J. Goings,3 Karl Mayer,4 Sonika Johri,5 Nithin Reddy,6 Aman Mehta,7 Niranjan Bhatia,8 Sonny
Rappaport,3 Daniel Mills,9 Charles H. Baldwin,4 Luning Zhao,3 Aaron Barbosa,10 Smarak Maity,10 and Pranav S. Mundada10
(Quantum Economic Development Consortium (QED-C) collaboration) ∗
1Quantum Circuits Inc, 25 Science Park, New Haven, CT 06511
2QED-C Technical Advisory Committee on Standards and Performance Benchmarks
3IonQ Inc, 4505 Campus Dr, College Park, MD 20740, USA
4Quantinuum, 303 S. Technology Ct, Broomfield, CO 80021, USA
5Coherent Computing, Cupertino, CA, USA
6San Jose State University, San Jose, USA
7University of California at Los Angeles, USA
8University of California, Berkeley, USA
9Quantinuum, Terrington House, 13-15 Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 1NL, UK
10Q-CTRL, Los Angeles, CA USA
(Dated: February 15, 2024)
The QED-C suite of Application-Oriented Benchmarks provides the ability to gauge performance charac-
teristics of quantum computers as applied to real-world applications. Its benchmark programs sweep over a
range of problem sizes and inputs, capturing key performance metrics related to the quality of results, total
time of execution, and quantum gate resources consumed. The work described in this manuscript investigates
challenges in broadening the relevance of this benchmarking methodology to applications of greater complexity.
First, we introduce a method for improving landscape coverage by varying algorithm parameters systematically,
exemplifying this functionality in a new scalable HHL linear equation solver benchmark. Second, we add a VQE
implementation of a Hydrogen Lattice simulation to the QED-C suite, and introduce a methodology for analyzing
the result quality and run-time cost trade-off. We observe a decrease in accuracy with increased number of qubits,
but only a mild increase in the execution time. Third, unique characteristics of a supervised machine-learning
classification application are explored as a benchmark to gauge the extensibility of the framework to new classes
of application. Applying this to a binary classification problem revealed the increase in training time required for
larger anzatz circuits, and the significant classical overhead. Fourth, we add methods to include optimization
and error mitigation in the benchmarking workflow which allows us to: identify a favourable trade off between
approximate gate synthesis and gate noise; observe the benefits of measurement error mitigation and a form of
deterministic error mitigation algorithm; and to contrast the improvement with the resulting time overhead. Look-
ing to the future, we discuss how the benchmark framework can be instrumental in facilitating the exploration of
algorithmic options and their impact on performance.
CONTENTS
I. Introduction 2
II. Background 3
A. System-Level Performance Benchmarks 3
B. Application-Oriented Benchmarks 3
III. Benchmarking An HHL Linear Solver 4
A. The HHL Algorithm 4
B. The HHL Benchmark Implementation 5
C. Results From Executing the HHL Benchmark 5
IV . Benchmarking a Hydrogen Lattice Simulation 7
A. Simulating a Hydrogen Lattice with VQE 7
B. The Hydrogen Lattice Benchmark Algorithm 8
∗ This work was sponsored by the Quantum Economic Development Con-
sortium (QED-C) and was performed under the auspices of the QED-C
Technical Advisory Committee on Standards and Performance Benchmarks.
The authors acknowledge many committee members for their input to and
feedback on the project and this manuscript.
C. Analysis of Benchmark Result Accuracy 9
D. Quality of Solution vs Execution Run-Time 11
V . Program Optimization Techniques 12
A. Error Mitigation with Qiskit Sampler 12
B. Quantum Circuit Transformation with TKET 13
C. Custom Execution Pipeline with Fire Opal 16
VI. Benchmarking Machine Learning Applications 17
A. Quantum Machine Learning 17
B. Image Recognition Quantum Algorithm 17
C. Image Recognition Benchmark Implementation 18
D. Simulation Results and Analysis 19
VII. Summary and Conclusions 20
Code Availability 21
Acknowledgement 21
References 22
arXiv:2402.08985v1  [quant-ph]  14 Feb 2024

===== PAGE 2 =====

2
I. INTRODUCTION
Quantum computing is in the early stages of its introduction
to a broad community of potential users in multiple application
areas, with new technologies and supporting software emerg-
ing regularly. For both providers and users to obtain optimal
results, it is important they be able to gauge the evolution of
these systems and evaluate available options. In this context, a
variety of methodologies for benchmarking performance and
characterizing improvements have become available to the
community.
Performance benchmarking tools span various levels of the
computing stack. At the component level, protocols such as
randomized benchmarking [1, 2], and gate set tomography [3],
are used to characterize individual components within the sys-
tem. System-level benchmarks, such as quantum volume [4],
cross-entropy benchmarking [5], mirror circuit benchmarks [6],
and CLOPS (Circuit-Layer Operations per Second) [ 7], pro-
vide a single metric measure of quality or speed of execution
of quantum programs. In combination, these two classes of
benchmarks complement each other. The former precisely
measures the performance of key elements, while the latter
aggregates system behavior, providing a summary view.
At the algorithm or application level, a number of bench-
marking suites have emerged that provide measures in several
dimensions of the performance experienced by users when run-
ning complete programs. These attempt to take into account
all factors contributing to the overall quality and run-time effi-
ciency of a quantum computing system. Factors include qubit
noise characteristics, program preparation and execution time,
classical processing of results, and data transfer to and from the
system [8–15]. Such benchmarks are valuable for users as they
provide measures that may be closer to their actual experience
and in the context of recognizable application scenarios.
One of these, the QED-C suite of Application-Oriented
Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing [14, 15],
takes an approach similar to that of the SPEC benchmarks for
classical computers [16, 17], providing algorithms and simple
applications structured as benchmarks that sweep over a range
of problem sizes and complexity. This enables a broad charac-
terization of the overall system performance to be expected for
many classes of application, in the dimensions of quality and
execution run-time, across different target quantum computing
systems.
However, creating benchmarks from applications comes
with several challenges. One requirement is to select meth-
ods that scalably quantify performance. For example, in the
QED-C suite, most applications used simple problem instances
producing computational basis states to ease testing. Moreover,
quantum algorithms come in many variants, and benchmark
results can be impacted dramatically by the particular imple-
mentation and execution options. For example, there are multi-
ple options for the ansatz used in a VQE algorithm [ 18], the
number of rounds (repetitions of a group of gates, resulting
in deeper circuit) in a QAOA algorithm [ 19], or the type of
encoding of data in a machine learning application [20]. Addi-
tionally, with variational algorithms, a classical optimizer must
be selected along with the freedom to choose hyperparameters,
which may impact the time to solution and the quality of results.
Another challenge is selecting appropriate datasets for use with
a particular algorithm. For example, in HHL, discussed below,
some datasets are efficiently verifiable while others are not.
The choices made in converting an algorithm to a scalable
and verifiable benchmark will have consequences on how the
benchmark performs on quantum hardware. Many of these
choices impact the number of two-qubit gates, which is the
dominant source of error in most current generation systems,
and therefore strongly correlates with the performance. Evi-
dence of this can be seen in the QED-C suite where decisions
made to simplify verification allow for effective compilation
that substantially reduces the number of two-qubit gates as
discussed below. Additionally, the choice to have some circuits
ideally generate computational basis states means results are
greatly improved with plurality voting error mitigation tech-
niques [21], which are known to scale poorly. Both of these
options are unique to the benchmark version of the application
and are not typical for an actual use case. It is important to
have benchmarks that both represent application use cases and
run with comparable resource requirements.
In this work, we describe several enhancements that have
been made to the QED-C suite. These were selected to bet-
ter match users’ experience in running algorithms. Several
new benchmark algorithms have been added, specifically to in-
crease the breadth and complexity of the applications included,
add coverage where gaps exist in areas of un-tested qubit num-
ber and depth, and to illustrate various execution methods and
metric collection options. We also examine the impact of pro-
gram optimization and error mitigation techniques and review
the enhancements made to enable the inclusion of these.
Our benchmark suite provides a platform in which new
applications can readily be developed, studied, and measured
without the need to build anew the standardized data collection
and reporting mechanisms required for each instance. By
varying the algorithm or its hyperparameters, while keeping
constant the problem definition, our approach can provide
useful information to developers, who can use the results to
analyze solution trade-o ffs in the context of various target
environments.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Back-
ground on the fundamentals guiding this work is provided
in section II. A new benchmark, based on a scalable version
of the HHL linear equation solver [ 22], is introduced in sec-
tion III. This new benchmark illustrates how variations on
the algorithm impact its volumetric profile and extends the
coverage of the benchmark suite. In section IV, we analyze the
run-time costs associated with finding the ground state energy
of a hydrogen lattice using a Variational Quantum Eigensolver
algorithm along with a methodology for analyzing the trade-
off between the quality of the result and the run-time cost to
achieve that quality. In section V, a set of program optimiza-
tion techniques is described along with a discussion of their
operation, the level of performance improvement obtained, the
cost associated with the technique, and the types of applica-
tions that exhibit the greatest impact. Lastly, in section VI,
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 3 =====

3
we extend the iterative benchmarking framework by including
a machine learning algorithm, a simple image classification
problem, that defines another application-specific measure and
requires more circuits iteratively than the VQE benchmark.
II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we review concepts and definitions from prior
benchmarking work that we reference throughout the remain-
der of this manuscript. We focus primarily on the application-
oriented level of performance evaluation, as there is already
a large body of reference material on component and system-
level benchmarks [1–3, 23–25].
A. System-Level Performance Benchmarks
We briefly describe here two well-known system-level per-
formance benchmarks, Quantum V olume (QV) [ 4, 26] and
V olumetric Benchmarking (VB) [6, 27]. As a single-number
metric of a quantum computer’s general capability, QV cap-
tures the combined effects of qubit number and result fidelity
for gate model computers [4, 28, 29]. VB was proposed to ad-
dress limitations of QV , using a method by which the observed
performance of the quantum computing system is plotted in a
two-dimensional depth× width “volumetric” grid. Our bench-
marks build upon the VB method, which highlights the ability
of a specific device to execute successfully both wide/shallow
and deep/narrow circuits, extending the square circuits repre-
sented by QV [30].
These two methods (QV and VB) characterize quantum
circuit execution quality and scale, but neither provides infor-
mation about the time it takes a program to run, which is a
key factor in evaluating the total cost of any computing so-
lution. Circuit Layer Operations per Second (CLOPS) was
introduced [7] as a measure of run-time performance com-
puted by executing a sequence of quantum volume circuits.
While CLOPS characterizes execution speed in a single num-
ber metric that includes data transfer, circuit operations, and
other latencies, it is not specific to any application. It also does
not capture compilation time or the trade-o ff between qual-
ity and run-time, or true time-to-solution, which is crucial to
understand when selecting machines for running applications.
B. Application-Oriented Benchmarks
System-level metrics are valuable as general measures of
system capability, but it can be challenging to predict how well
a machine with a certain level of general performance would
be able to address a specific class of application. Application-
focused benchmarks execute well-defined programs that aim
to directly yield performance metrics specific to an application
type.
The QED-C suite offers an effective methodology to eval-
uate the performance of a wide variety of quantum pro-
grams across a range of quantum hardware and simulator sys-
1 2 3 6 11 20 36 66119217394717 1K 2K 4K 8K14K26K47K86K156K
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
QV=2048
Bernstein-Vazirani (1)
Hamiltonian Simulation
Phase Estimation
Quantum Fourier Transform (1)
Shor's Order Finding (1)
Amplitude EstimationGrover's Search
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator-future  Sep 25, 2023 00:06:23 UTC
FIG. 1: A V olumetric Positioning Plot. Results from executing
several of the application-oriented benchmark programs on a classi-
cally implemented noisy simulator of a device that exhibits a quantum
volume of 2048. The result quality of the application circuits (shown
on a color scale) degrades as the width and depth of the circuits range
outside of the quantum volume and volumetric benchmark regions
(shown in dark and light grey rectangles). Each application has a
unique profile and the success or failure in its execution can be pre-
dicted (approximately) from the system-level benchmarks.
tems [14, 15, 31]. Its benchmark programs are structured to
sweep over a range of problem sizes and input characteris-
tics, while systematically capturing key performance metrics,
such as quality of result, execution run-time, and resources
consumed (i.e. gate count). Supporting infrastructure and ab-
stractions make them accessible to a broad audience of users.
The framework supports benchmarking of individual circuit ex-
ecution as well as iterative algorithms that repeatedly execute
quantum circuits as part of an algorithm such as QAOA [19]
or VQE [18].
Throughout this manuscript, the figure of merit used to
represent the quality of result for individual circuits is the
“Normalized Hellinger Fidelity”, a modification of the standard
“Hellinger Fidelity” that scales the metric to account for the uni-
form distribution produced by a completely noisy device. This
is described in detail in our prior work [14]. For iterative algo-
rithms that address problems such as combinatorial optimiza-
tion, we calculate figures of merit that are application-specific
as described in Ref. [15]. We use the new Hydrogen Lattice and
Machine Learning benchmarks to explore application-specific
figures of merit derived from functions of observables and how
these are impacted by various algorithm options.
Figure 1 illustrates a visualization technique, referred to as
“volumetric positioning”, that shows the quality of the result ob-
tained from executing each application circuit type, at increas-
ing width and depth, on a classically implemented quantum
simulator measured to have a quantum volume of 2048 (depo-
larizing error 0.05% for one qubit gates and 0.5% for two qubit
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 4 =====

4
gates, used throughout this manuscript). Results are plotted
over a background defined by the quantum volume of the target
machine (dark grey rectangle) and the success region estimated
for volumetric circuits (light grey rectangles). Each application
is characterized by its “profile”, a visual representation of the
relationship between circuit depth and the number of qubits
used as the problem size grows. Several of the benchmark
programs have multiple versions implemented, as indicated by
a number that can follow its name, e.g. Bernstein-Vazirani (1).
A correlation can be seen in Figure 1 between the execution
fidelity of the application-oriented benchmark circuits at spe-
cific qubit widths and circuit depths and the results predicted
by QV or VB. Circuits with fidelity greater than ∼ 0.5 lie
within the region defined by the QV of the target system or in
the success regions predicted by VB. This approach helps to
validate that results from the application-oriented benchmarks
align with those of the system-level benchmarks.
The QED-C benchmark framework incorporates multiple
metrics for assessing execution run-time performance. This is
important because total execution time significantly influences
the overall number of applications that can be processed within
a defined time window on a quantum computer. Quantum
algorithms such as QAOA and VQE are iterative in nature
and any run-time overhead is magnified by the number of
circuit executions performed. The framework implements a
standard mechanism for the collection of the total elapsed time
telapsed and the quantum execution time on a backend system
tquantum (reported differently by each service provider). In this
manuscript, these times are represented in various plots with
the labels “Elapsed” and “Quantum”.
Execution time for quantum circuits is closely related to the
gate depth of the circuit. In the plots in this manuscript, we
use the label “Algorithmic Depth” to refer to the number of
gate operations in the longest path of the circuit, as defined
by a user at the quantum programming API level. The label
“Normalized Depth” refers to an estimate of the gate depth that
is expected after transpiling the program to the gate set of a
representative backend system. For comparison across different
backend systems, we approximate the transpiled circuit depth
by transpiling circuits with Qiskit at the default optimization
level 1, using a default gate set denoted by [‘rx’, ‘ry’, ‘rz’,
‘cx’]. More detail about execution time and circuit depth can
be found in our prior work [15].
III. BENCHMARKING AN HHL LINEAR SOLVER
The Harrow-Hassidim-Lloyd (HHL) algorithm [22, 32] is
theoretically capable of solving linear systems of equations
with exponential speedup over classical solutions (apart from
data loading and extraction). We selected this algorithm as a
benchmark for two reasons. First, the algorithm is constructed
from multiple instances of smaller subroutines that we pre-
viously configured as benchmarks, together with a particular
quantum controlled-rotation implementation. This combina-
tion enables us to reasonably predict where the benchmark
profile would lie in the volumetric spectrum.
Secondly, the HHL algorithm employs two independent
qubit registers: one for input data, which scales as the size of
the problem matrix, and another for performing phase estima-
tion, which scales as the bit precision of the problem matrix
elements. These registers provide a mechanism by which to
vary the circuit complexity, impacting the algorithm’s profile
and extending its coverage across the volumetric spectrum.
In this section, we review the HHL algorithm and our bench-
mark implementation. The HHL algorithm has been studied
extensively, and there are numerous tutorials and circuit ex-
amples available [33–37]. However, most of these have been
constrained to a fixed number of qubits or a limited set of
problem instances, primarily to simplify the implementation’s
complexity. For our benchmark, we developed an implementa-
tion that achieves a modest level of scaling, closely resembling
one that is described in a recent study [38].
A. The HHL Algorithm
The HHL algorithm prepares a quantum state that encodes
the solution, x, for the linear equation shown here:
Ax = b (1)
The transformation represented by the N-by-N matrix A is
applied to an unknown N-dimensional vector x, resulting in
the vector b. Finding the value of x is equivalent to determining
the inverse of A and applying it to b. The matrix A is assumed
to be Hermitian without loss of generality [22].
When the HHL algorithm is executed, it generates an n-
qubit quantum state whose amplitudes are proportional to the
N = 2n components of the solution vector x in Equation 1. It
is important to note that the HHL algorithm does not directly
provide the complete solution vector x, since a computational
basis measurement on the output state only returns one random
bitstring with a probability given by the square of the amplitude,
rather than the full list of amplitudes. However, if one is
interested in a property of the solution vector, such as the
expectation value of an observable in the solution state, the
HHL algorithm can be used to extract that information.
Furthermore, there are several caveats that must be satisfied
for the HHL algorithm to provide an exponential speedup over
classical matrix inversion [32, 33]. First, the row sparsity of A,
which is the number of non-zero elements per row, must be at
most polynomial in n. Second, the condition number κ, which
is the ratio between the largest and smallest eigenvalues of A,
must also be at most polynomial in n.
Here, we describe how the HHL algorithm functions. First,
an n-qubit “input” register is initialized in the state |b⟩, rep-
resenting the vector b. A Quantum Phase Estimation (QPE)
routine is used to encode this input state in the eigenbasis of the
matrix A. To realize this, a second group ofnp qubits called the
“phase” register, is placed into an equal superposition. (This
register is sometimes referred to as the “clock” register.) A
Hamiltonian evolution, defined by the matrix A and controlled
by the value in the phase register, is then performed on the
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 5 =====

5
input register, as in Equation 2 where Np = 2np.
1pNp
Np−1X
t=0
|t⟩ e−iAt|b⟩ (2)
By decomposing the input state |b⟩ = P
jβ j
µ j
E
into the
eigenbasis of A, the state is then given by Equation 3:
X
j
β j
1pNp
Np−1X
t=0
|t⟩ e−iλ jt µ j
E
, (3)
whereλ j is the eigenvalue corresponding to
µ j
E
. The next step
is an inverse QFT on the phase register, resulting in the state
shown in Equation 4:
N−1X
j=0
β j
λ j
Eµ j
E
(4)
To effect a matrix inversion, an ancilla qubit is appended to
the circuit and a rotation on the ancilla is performed, condi-
tioned on the phase register. This results in the state in Equa-
tion 5, in which sinθ j/2 = C
λ j
for constant C≤ 1
κ andκ is the
condition number of A.
N−1X
j=0
β j
λ j
Eµ j
E  cosθ j/2|0⟩ + sinθ j/2|1⟩ (5)
Following this, an inverse Quantum Phase Estimation
(QPE†) is applied to the input and phase qubits, and measure-
ment is performed on the qubits, conditioned on a measurement
outcome of|1⟩ in the ancilla. The final state is proportional to
the unknown vector x, as seen in Equation 6.
X
j
β j
λ j
µ j
E
=|x⟩ (6)
The post-selection step is used to amplify the components of
the quantum state that correspond to non-zero elements since
the solution to the linear system is encoded in these non-zero
amplitudes.
B. The HHL Benchmark Implementation
There are many ways that the HHL algorithm can be imple-
mented, with various trade-offs [33, 34]. We outline here the
design choices made to ensure a scalable and efficient imple-
mentation, tailored for execution as a benchmark on current
quantum computing systems.
For scalability, we defined a set of problem instances repre-
sented by matrices A and vectors b for a range of phase register
qubit numbers np and input qubit numbers nb. The values
for these instances are generated such that the matrices are
sufficiently sparse and well-conditioned, making it possible
to efficiently load the non-zero elements of A onto a quantum
register, and to prepare the input state |b⟩. Each instance is
given by a quantum oracle corresponding to a 2-sparse matrix
A withκ≤ 4. The elements of A are chosen as fractions that
are exactly expressible with np bits of precision.
The Hamiltonian evolution is implemented in the bench-
marking code using the algorithm of [ 39] for sparse Hamil-
tonian simulation based on a quantum walk. This algorithm
makes use of an oracle V acting on two registers of size nb
according to V|b1⟩| b2⟩ =|b1⟩| a(b1)⊕ b2⟩, for all length-nb bit-
strings b1 and b2. Here, the binary vector b1 indexes the rows
of A and a(b1) is the column index in which the b1-th row of A
has an off-diagonal element. For this reason, the Hamiltonian
simulation part of the HHL algorithm implementation requires
2nb qubits.
To implement the controlled rotation step in Equation 5, we
use the algorithm for uniformly controlled rotations in [ 40].
More generally, the rotation angleθ j = sin−1(2C/λ j) could be
computed efficiently fromλ j using quantum arithmetic [41].
However, for small problem sizes the constant overhead of
quantum arithmetic is too large to be practical for realistic near-
term devices [42]. The uniformly controlled rotation requires
a number of gates exponential in np, so it is important that np
not scale with n in order for the benchmark to be scalable.
To explore volumetric profiles for the algorithm, we vary the
values of nb and np as a function of the total number of qubits
under test, using Equation 7. The value fornb is multiplied by2
for the reason described above, and the addition of 1 represents
the ancilla qubit used for inverse rotation.
ntotal = 2× nb + np + 1 (7)
In general, the value of np should be capped at some upper
limit in order for the benchmark to be scalable, however the
results presented below use a modest number of qubits and
therefore np is allowed to vary over the full range consistent
with Equation 7.
The benchmark sweeps over a range of available qubit
widths [min_qubits : max_qubits]. For each width ntotal, valid
values of nb and np are determined, random problem matrices
A and vectors b are chosen, quantum circuits are generated, and
the expected measurement distributions are calculated. After
executing each circuit, measurement results are analyzed, and
normalized and Hellinger fidelity metrics are computed from
the observed and ideal outcome distributions [14]. The bench-
mark returns the average of these metrics across all problem
instances and combinations of nb and np.
C. Results From Executing the HHL Benchmark
For this benchmark, we targeted the gap in Figure 1 between
the Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT) (1) and the Amplitude
Estimation volumetric profiles. The sum of the circuit depths
of the components of the HHL algorithm suggests that it should
lie just to the right of the QFT (1). Additionally, by executing
the circuit multiple times while varying the width of the input
and phase registers, it is possible to ‘broaden’ the algorithm’s
profile and fill much of the targeted gap.
In Figure 2, we show the results of executing the HHL bench-
mark on a noisy quantum simulator from 4 to 12 qubits, using
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 6 =====

6
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
Hellinger
Normalized
4 5 6 6 7 7 8 8 8 9 9 10 10 11 12
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0
200
400
600
800
1000Circuit Depth
Algorithmic Depth
Normalized Depth
Benchmark Results - HHL - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator-future  Feb 03, 2024 21:36:32 UTC
FIG. 2: Execution of HHL Benchmark up to 12 Qubits. Here
we show the results of running the HHL benchmark on the noisy
quantum simulator from 4 to 12 qubits. The benchmark is configured
to sweep several combinations of input and phase register sizes at
each total width executed (corresponding to n_total in Equation 7).
As a consequence, there are multiple execution groups at several of
the circuit widths. This plot shows the average fidelities and circuit
depth for each qubit width. For example, at 8 qubits, there are 3 valid
combinations of input and phase size: (1,5), (2,3), and (3,1).
1 2 3 4 7 11 18 29 47 77124202327529857 1K 2K 4K 6K10K16K
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
QV=2048
Quantum Fourier Transform (1)
HHL
Amplitude Estimation
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator-future  Oct 02, 2023 03:34:16 UTC
FIG. 3: Broadening Benchmark Coverage with HHL. Here, the
broadening of the application profile is visible in the volumetric posi-
tioning plot. The HHL benchmark fills the gap between the Quantum
Fourier Transform (1) and Amplitude Estimation benchmarks. Each
of the rectangles shown in the horizontal row for the HHL benchmark
at a specific qubit width represents a variation in the algorithm’s input
and phase sizes. We sweep several of these to ensure more coverage
of the width× height region.
this broadened mode. For a given maximum number of qubits,
a valid combination of input and phase size is determined us-
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
Hellinger
Normalized
4 5 6 7 8
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0
200
400
600Circuit Depth
Algorithmic Depth
Normalized Depth
Benchmark Results - HHL - Qiskit
Device=quantinuum-h1-240117  Feb 03, 2024 21:31:48 UTC
FIG. 4: Execution of HHL Benchmark on Quantinuum H1-1. Here
we show the results of running the HHL benchmark on Quantinuum’s
H1-1 quantum computer. The benchmark was only run with nb = 1
but could be configured to sweep over a wider range to more fully
cover the volumetric region. This plot shows the average fidelities and
circuit depth for each qubit width. (Data provided by Quantinuum.)
ing Equation 7. In this case, for 12 qubits, valid values for the
input and phase size are nb = 4 and np = 3. From this, we
generate a sweep over valid combinations of smaller phase and
input sizes, producing circuit variants with a variety of depths
at each circuit width. At the maximum and minimum, there is
only a single valid combination, but in the middle range, there
are multiple valid combinations. The second figure, Figure 3,
shows that by varying the width of the phase and input registers,
the volumetric profile of the circuit is e ffectively broadened,
increasing the coverage of the benchmark suite.
It is interesting to note the variation in fidelity and circuit
depth for the qubit numbers in the middle of the profile. For
example, at 8 qubits, there are 3 valid combinations of input
and phase register size: (1,5), (2,3), and (3,1). Because of the
implementation of the quantum phase estimation, the depth of
the circuit grows faster with the number of input qubits than
with the phase qubits, yet the fidelity of the execution is higher
with fewer phase qubits. We conjecture that this is due to the
higher number of two-qubit gates for circuits with more phase
qubits. This example illustrates the way in which the bench-
mark framework can be useful in exploring the characteristics
of quantum algorithms. This approach could also be applied to
other benchmarks in the suite, such as Amplitude Estimation,
which similarly employs groups of qubits for specific functions,
the size of which can be varied.
In Figure 4 we show the results from execution of the HHL
benchmark on the Quantinuum H1-1 quantum computer with
1000 shots. H1-1 currently has 20 qubits, measured two-qubit
gate fidelities >99.87% from standard randomized benchmark-
ing, and QV=219. H1-1 is also capable of mid-circuit measure-
ment and conditional logic, which is required for this HHL
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 7 =====

7
benchmark. The HHL algorithm was run with nb = 1 and
np = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 but in principle could be run up to ntotal = 20
with non-zero result fidelity expected up to ntotal≈ 15 based
on simulations. H1-1 ran the exact transpiled circuits from the
QED-C suite, no further compilation was applied, although in
principle could be used to further improve performance. The
data in Figure 4 shows that the HHL benchmark is possible
to run on current hardware with small qubit number. We omit
execution time data here to focus our analysis, as the execution
times for the HHL algorithm closely track circuit depth and
align with trends in earlier benchmarks [14].
The HHL benchmark is currently implemented to evaluate
performance based on the fidelity of circuit execution as com-
pared to ideal. However, the benchmark could be enhanced to
produce an application-specific metric based on how well the
algorithm solves the linear equation that is given as its input.
We did not address this in our work, as there are many variables
to consider in developing a valid figure of merit. The approach
would be to implement a method (2), similar to the other itera-
tive benchmarks, which computes a figure of merit based on
how accurately the algorithm solves the linear equation. This
work is left for future research.
IV . BENCHMARKING A HYDROGEN LA TTICE
SIMULA TION
Quantum computing offers new and efficient ways to tackle
classically challenging problems in chemistry and may be
particularly relevant for the electronic structure problem,
which can require exponential resources on classical ma-
chines [43, 44]. Although an exact solution to the electronic
structure problem can be obtained with quantum phase estima-
tion (QPE), the resource requirements of QPE are unattainable
on today’s NISQ devices [45] due to high rates of error. In con-
trast, the Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE) algorithm
uses a hybrid quantum-classical approach with more attainable
error requirements. As a result, it is thought to be a candidate
algorithm that could be capable of addressing such electronic
structure problems.
In this section, we introduce a VQE implementation of a Hy-
drogen Lattice simulation structured to make use of the QED-C
benchmarking framework. The VQE algorithm has been used
previously as the basis for performance benchmarking of quan-
tum computers [46–50]. We found it necessary to constrain
some characteristics of the problem to be addressed and care-
fully choose features of the benchmarking implementation for
it to be practically useful for exploring various behaviors of
the simulation as parameters and execution options are varied.
Our detailed analysis helps to quantify the performance of the
algorithm on a target quantum computing system, with particu-
lar emphasis on the trade-off between the time taken to execute
the application and the quality of the result obtained.
FIG. 5: Hydrogen Lattice Schematic. The hydrogen lattice used in
this work consists of one-dimensional chains of N hydrogen atoms
spaced equally r Å apart. Here an 8-hydrogen chain at 1.0 Å inter-
atomic spacing is depicted. More complex geometries, such as 2D or
3D arrangements in sheets or pyramids, may also be considered in
future work.
0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21
Iterations
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Energy (Hartree)
FCI Energy    = -1.1371
DOCI Energy = -1.1371
Random Energy = 0.2316
Solution Energy = -1.1179
Benchmark Results - Hydrogen Lattice (2) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator  Sep 09, 2023 06:03:04 UTC
qubits=2, radius=0.75, shots=1000
FIG. 6: Hydrogen Lattice Benchmark on 2 Qubits. Results from
executing this benchmark on a simulation of a simple chain of 2
Hydrogen atoms separated by 0.75 Å. The benchmark implements a
VQE algorithm using an upCCD ansatz with observables derived from
the problem Hamiltonian. A classical optimizer iteratively executes
the ansatz, varying its parameters to find the ground state energy and
converging to a final energy near to the classically computed exact FCI
and DOCI energy. The benchmark was executed on a noisy quantum
simulator with a quantum volume of 2048. The energy computed at
the final iteration is displayed along with relevant reference energies.
A. Simulating a Hydrogen Lattice with VQE
A simple example of the hydrogen lattice problem is de-
picted in Figure 5. The challenge is to determine the radius
at which the ground state energy of this chain of atoms is the
lowest, by sweeping over a range of radii and computing the
ground state energy at each. Our benchmark is limited to eval-
uating the ability of a quantum computing system to calculate
the ground state energy at any of a small set of pre-defined
radii. We currently use hydrogen chains of varying lengths but
plan to examine more complex geometries in the future (see
Ref. [50] for alternatives.)
Using a variational optimization loop, the VQE algorithm
can estimate the ground state energy of a given Hamiltonian,
rendering it well-suited for quantum chemistry applications.
Our benchmark VQE algorithm implements a trial wave func-
tion using a unitary pair coupled-cluster doubles (upCCD)
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 8 =====

8
ansatz with observables derived from the problem Hamiltonian.
A classical optimizer iteratively executes the ansatz, varying
its parameters in an attempt to find the lowest ground state
energy. Figure 5 shows the progression of the benchmark over
each iteration as it converges to a final energy near to the clas-
sically computed (and numerically exact) full configuration
interaction (FCI) and doubly-occupied configuration interac-
tion (DOCI) energies. The final energy is displayed along with
relevant reference energies.
The heuristic, but variational, nature of VQE allows it to
operate with shallower circuits compared to common QPE
algorithms [51], and the iterative, hybrid quantum-classical
approach allows for some noise tolerance as the noisy quan-
tum function is classically minimized [52]. The algorithm is
inherently approximate except in certain specific cases, and it
may be susceptible to noise from insufficient statistical sam-
pling, as it calculates an expectation value (energy). While
other approaches exist for chemistry problems, such as Robust
Amplitude Estimation [53], VQE’s blend of efficiency and ro-
bustness against noise makes it a compelling instrument for
near-term quantum chemical calculations.
Navigating the broad range of potential Hamiltonians for
VQE benchmarking presents a significant challenge. Various
Hamiltonian libraries, e.g. HamLib, have been implemented
in [49] and others, reflecting the wide variety of molecules
and basis sets available. Amid this complexity, we chose the
hydrogen lattices for their simplicity and flexibility. They are
easily tunable systems, allowing for diverse physical scenarios
to be explored. Moreover, these lattices are exactly solvable in
the one-dimensional (1D) case using Density Matrix Renormal-
ization Group (DMRG) methods [54], offering a benchmark
against which approximate methods can be assessed. This
feature, along with their operation at half-filling with mini-
mal basis sets — a trait shared by many “real-world” valence
electron active spaces — enables the thorough investigation of
various electronic correlation regimes.
Though no single model can fully encapsulate all possible
chemical systems, hydrogen lattices serve as practical and rep-
resentative models [43, 50, 55–57]. For instance, in dealing
with strongly correlated Hamiltonians, a similarly complex
system can often be constructed using a hydrogen lattice. By
judiciously selecting the lattice’s geometry, one can create
Hamiltonian complexity that closely mirrors the original sys-
tem, and VQE performance is correspondingly similar. Thus,
hydrogen lattices offer a manageable and effective model, faith-
fully reflecting various facets of more complex systems, and
validating their use for VQE benchmarking.
Practical implementation of VQE requires the selection of a
parameterized trial circuit, or ansatz, that introduces additional
layers of complexity for benchmarking. Given this, our work
initially focuses on the upCCD ansatz, which treats electrons
as pairs rather than as independent, single electrons. This ap-
proach is particularly effective for closed-shell systems, where
electron pairing is a natural representation [58–60]. In other
words, the upCCD ansatz intrinsically modifies the structure
of the problem by allowing only paired double excitations.
On account of the upCCD ansatz, we can represent quantum
Algorithm1 Benchmark Algorithm for VQE
1: target← backend_id
2: initialize_metrics()
3: for size← min_size, max_size do
4: circuit_de f← de f ine_problem(problem, size, args)
5: for restart _id← 1, max_restarts do
6: cost_ f unction← de f ine_cost_ f unction(problem)
7: circuit, num_params← create_circuit(circuit_de f)
8: cached_circuit← compile_circuit(circuit)
9: params[α]← random(num_params)
10: while minimizer() not done do ▷ minimizing
11: circuit← apply _params(cached_circuit, params)
12: for pauli_op← problem do
13: counts← execute(target, circuit, num_shots)
14: end for
15: energy, quality← cost_ f unction(counts)
16: store_iteration_metrics(quality, timing)
17: params[α]← optimize(params[α])
18: done← True if lowest(energy) found
19: end while
20: compute_and_store_restart _metrics()
21: end for
22: compute_and_store_group_metrics()
23: end for
states efficiently by mapping to electron pairs [58, 61], which
simplifies the problem significantly. A key benefit of this
approach is that it cuts down the number of qubits we need
by half compared to other methods like the Jordan-Wigner
mapping. However, it’s important to note that this method
only works for certain types of systems, specifically those with
paired electrons.
In addition to a reduced qubit requirement, the paired map-
ping provides another practical benefit. The upCCD Hamil-
tonian can be partitioned into three qubit-wise commuting
groups, such that only three circuits need to be measured to
evaluate the energy, regardless of problem size. This is in con-
trast to other mappings, where energy measurements require a
circuit count that can grow quartically with system size.
Assuming full connectivity, the upCCD method requires sig-
nificantly fewer entangling gates than traditional unitary cou-
pled cluster methods—about two orders of magnitude less [62].
Additionally, if gates can be applied in parallel, the time to
execute the upCCD circuit is further reduced, potentially be-
coming linear with respect to system size. The upCCD ap-
proach, characterized by its less complex circuit and fewer
measurements, is, therefore, a strong early option for NISQ
applications. Though more complex ansatz will be explored in
future work, we note that for cases where upCCD lacks accu-
racy, enhancements like orbital optimization and perturbation
theory are viable options [59, 63].
B. The Hydrogen Lattice Benchmark Algorithm
The implementation of the VQE algorithm, shown in Al-
gorithm 1, is modeled after the Max-Cut QAOA benchmark
implementation from [ 15]. We describe the algorithm here,
omitting some details for brevity. As another type of iterative
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 9 =====

9
quantum algorithm, the new benchmark similarly optimizes by
iterating over circuits executed with varying parameters, but
brings additional complexity. The benchmark can be config-
ured to sweep over a range of qubit widths, executing the VQE
algorithm at the problem size associated with that qubit width.
For each problem size, a limited set of inputs (radii in this
case) can be selected, and the results at each radius collected
and displayed. For each radius, however, execution is more
involved and we focus here on several important distinctions.
One key difference is the addition of a loop over the three
circuits with their appended basis rotations to measure the
multiple non-commuting upCCD Hamiltonian terms of the
hydrogen lattice simulation [ 58]. For every iteration within
the VQE algorithm, we find the overall expectation value by
summing over the expectation value of all these individual
terms. This requires an additional for loop that goes through
every Hamiltonian term to collect the measurement counts for
each one. The counts variable represents an array of counts
for each Pauli term, rather than just the single counts seen in
each iteration of the Max-Cut benchmark. Measurements of
execution fidelity and run-time are similarly collected as arrays
over the Pauli terms and aggregated in summary displays.
The execution parameters for the Hydrogen Lattice VQE
benchmark are di fferent from those of the MaxCut QAOA
benchmark. For the Hydrogen Lattice simulation, there is only
a single cost-function parameter α (rather than the β and γ
parameters used in QAOA). This α generally encompasses the
parameter composition that a VQE ansatz might have. There is
also the radius parameter, the spacing constantr that is specific
to the Hydrogen Lattice problem.
Another complication to consider is related to the hydrogen
lattice Hamiltonians over which we are iterating. For every
system size, there are different shapes of the hydrogen lattice
as well as the spacing constant r. In future work, we will need
to add an option to execute over di fferent Hamiltonians that
refer to different shapes of the hydrogen lattice (1D, 2D, 3D)
in addition to the spacing constant.
As with our other benchmark algorithms, this benchmark
is implemented with multiple methods. The simpler of these,
Method (1), gauges the fidelity of the VQE ansatz execution
using the normalized Hellinger fidelity. Executing the VQE
ansatz at various sizes, we expect to acquire an ideal distri-
bution over the outcome space. For our analysis in the next
section, we can state specifically that, for the VQE ansatz,
as the problem size grows larger, the fidelity will generally
decrease due to noise for the same number of shots.
The iterative, variational VQE algorithm discussed in this
section is invoked as Method (2) of the Hydrogen Lattice
Benchmark. The entirety of the discussion in this manuscript
is centered around the implementation and analysis of results
from this Method (2) of the benchmark.
C. Analysis of Benchmark Result Accuracy
The final ground state energy that results from the execu-
tion of the VQE hydrogen lattice benchmark algorithm can
0.000 0.025 0.050 0.075 0.100 0.125 0.150 0.175
Cumulative Quantum Execution Time (s)
10 3
10 2
10 1
100
Accuracy Ratio Error
Chem. Accuracy = 0.9988
Accuracy Ratio = 0.9859
Solution Quality = 0.9946
Benchmark Results - Hydrogen Lattice (2) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator  Sep 09, 2023 06:03:04 UTC
qubits=2, radius=0.75, shots=1000
FIG. 7: Hydrogen Lattice Benchmark Results Analysis. Here we
present a detailed analysis of the data shown in Figure 6. Two figures
of merit, the “Accuracy Ratio” and “Solution Quality”, are computed
as ratios of the solution energy to the FCI energy, scaled relative to
the energy produced from a random measurement distribution. At
each iteration, the error in these metrics is displayed on a log scale to
highlight results near optimal. The grey band envelops energy values
within the commonly accepted threshold for “chemical accuracy”, or
1.6× 10−3 Hartree, scaled similarly. Here, the algorithm converged
to an energy about an order of magnitude from chemical accuracy.
Results are plotted against the cumulative quantum execution time to
capture the run-time cost of executing the algorithm.
be compared against a classically computed “exact energy”.
While Figure 6 shows the energy computed by the VQE algo-
rithm along with the relevant reference energies, we introduce
in Figure 7 several new figures of merit, or measures of accu-
racy, computed from the same benchmark data. The derivation
and significance of these is discussed in this section.
The simplest measure of the accuracy of a simulation result
is the absolute energy difference ∆E between the application’s
computed result (solution energy) and the exact FCI energy.
This is the method used in much of the literature that explores
the use of quantum computers for computational chemistry [46–
48]. A given value of absolute energy difference is considered
a good result if it falls within the commonly accepted threshold
for “chemical accuracy”, or 1.6× 10−3 Hartree. In Figure 6,
this ∆E is 0.0192 or about 12 times the acceptable distance for
chemical accuracy.
However, it is challenging to gauge whether an absolute en-
ergy difference is good, mediocre, or really bad, as it depends
greatly on the nature and size of the problem it addresses, mak-
ing it difficult to use as a generalized performance benchmark.
Even more complicated is deciding on a metric to formalize
the accuracy of the VQE algorithm at intermediate steps. What
might be considered a “good" result is highly dependent on the
application. For example, while large fluctuations in the energy
at the start of the VQE may be acceptable, the same fluctua-
tions towards the end of the iterations could be considered a
failure of the algorithm to find a true ground state. There is
also an issue of scale - because the VQE could result in a state
close to but not exactly the ground state, it is difficult to define
what a successful energy might be for different applications.
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 10 =====

10
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
Cumulative Quantum Execution Time (s)
10 3
10 2
10 1
100
Accuracy Ratio Error
Chem. Accuracy = 0.9995
Accuracy Ratio = 0.9690
Solution Quality = 0.9848
Benchmark Results - Hydrogen Lattice (2) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator  Sep 10, 2023 06:12:55 UTC
qubits=4, radius=0.75, shots=1000
FIG. 8: Hydrogen Lattice Results Analysis on 4 Qubits. This plot
presents the error in two figures of merit, the Accuracy Ratio AR, and
the Solution Quality S Q, for a 4-qubit Hydrogen Lattice simulation
problem. During initial iterations of the algorithm, the accuracy ratio
metric takes on negative values, resulting in an error greater the1.0.
The solution quality is normalized so that its values always lie in the
range [0.0, 1.0], ensuring that a full trace appears in the plot.
Another complication could be what to use as a “correct"
ground state energy to verify the VQE’s estimated value. As
an example, because the upCCD ansatz operates in a seniority-
zero Hilbert subspace, the exact solution for the ground state
energy is found via DOCI [58], which is the exact solution in
the seniority-zero subspace. In other words, while FCI will
calculate an exact solution in the full Hilbert space, the upCCD
ansatz will converge instead to the DOCI energy.
For our purposes, we introduce a new figure of merit rele-
vant for benchmarking, the “Accuracy Ratio” or AR. Defined
in Equation 8, this metric is calculated as a ratio of the com-
puted energy Esolution to the exact FCI energy EFCI, scaled
relative to the energy that would be computed using a quantum
system that returns completely random measurement values,
generating a uniform distribution (the “random” energy) or
Erandom.
AR = 1.0−| Esolution− EFCI|
| Erandom− EFCI| (8)
The values of EFCI, EDOCI, EHFEFCI, and Erandom, are com-
puted (classically) in advance for each problem that is ad-
dressed by the benchmark. With this approach, running the
benchmark program requires only the execution of the algo-
rithm under test, followed by a comparison against the previ-
ously computed reference values. Note that AR can take on a
value that is outside of the range [0, 1].
To bound our metric in the range [0, 1] we define a second
figure of merit, referred to as “Solution Quality” orS Q, defined
in Equation 9.
S Q =− arctan

Esolution
EFCI
· p· 2
π
 (9)
0 0.20.40.60.8 1 1.21.41.61.8 2 2.22.42.62.8 3 3.23.43.63.8 4
Cumulative Elapsed Quantum Execution Time (s)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10Problem Size (# of Variables)
Benchmark Results - Hydrogen Lattice (2) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator  Sep 09, 2023 06:47:36 UTC
shots=1000, radius=None, restarts=1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy Ratio
FIG. 9: Area Plot Shows Quality /Run-Time Trade-off. In this
“area plot”, each horizontal row summarizes the data for the execution
of the benchmark at a specific number of qubits. Each rectangle in
the horizontal strip represents the elapsed quantum execution time.
The elapsed time includes circuit compilation, transpilation, initializa-
tion and loading, and the final transfer of result data to the classical
computer for classical processing. Elapsed time is a realistic repre-
sentation of the time that a user will experience when executing a
quantum circuit of this type.
The metric S Q is a measure of where the solution energy
Esolution is positioned in the range from EFCI to infinity. Since
the most interesting computed energies lie closer to EFCI, we
found it necessary to apply a conditioning function to the ratio
S Q to make it useful as a normalized metric. A heuristically
determined “precision” factor p (default 5.0) determines the
shape of the curve that is conditioned by the arctan function
and is chosen to best portray the results seen in this region.
The difference between these two figures of merit is illus-
trated in Figure 8. The accuracy ratio AR is seen to take on
negative values, resulting in an error that is greater than 1.0.
The normalized value of solution quality S Q is bounded in
the range [0.0, 1.0]. The value of AR acts as a measure of the
degree to which a quantum computing system is more effective
than a random number generator. The value ofS Q is useful for
visualizations that depend upon a bounded set of values for all
to be visible. There are trade-offs between the two, and in this
work, we primarily use AR, since the shape of the S Q curve
depends on precision p which can vary based on the size of the
problem.
The grey band seen in the figure envelops energy values
that lie within the commonly accepted threshold for “chemical
accuracy”, or 1.6× 10−3 Hartree, scaled for AR using Equa-
tion 8. In this 4-qubit case, the algorithm converged to an
energy about two orders of magnitude from chemical accuracy,
when viewed in the AR accuracy ratio domain from EFCI to
Erandom.
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 11 =====

11
2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Number of Qubits
0
2
4
6
8
10Error in Accuracy Ratio (%)
Benchmark Results - Hydrogen Lattice (2) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator-230910-5r  Jan 30, 2024 23:58:40 UTC
qubits=14, shots=1000, radius=0.75, restarts=5
FIG. 10: Hydrogen Lattice Accuracy Ratio Error over a Range of
Qubit Widths. Here, the Hydrogen Lattice benchmark was executed
on a noisy simulator over a range of qubit widths, from 2 to 14. Each
bar represents the error in the accuracy ratio computed in the final
iteration at each qubit width, averaged over 5 restarts. Degradation
in the solution quality is evident as the problem size increases. This
is largely due to the decrease in result fidelity seen in method (1),
correlated with the depth of the ansatz circuit. Other factors may
also impact the results, such as the limited shot count or the random
initialization of angles which can lead to barren plateaus.
D. Quality of Solution vs Execution Run-Time
In iterative algorithms, the quality of the results obtained
is impacted by the length of time the algorithm is permitted
to execute. Here, we show how benchmarking results are
presented in ways that permit some comparisons across system
size, quality, and runtime. We also describe the methods used
to collect and analyze the metrics and illustrate the time versus
quality trade-off for the Hydrogen Lattice VQE algorithm using
a performance profile referred to as an “area plot”, introduced
in our previous work [15].
An example of an area plot depicting the Quality/Time trade-
off is shown in Figure 9. It presents data collected for the
benchmark on problems ranging from 2 to 8 qubits and exe-
cuted on the same noisy quantum simulator used in prior plots.
Each horizontal row represents successive iterations at each
problem size (number of qubits), where position on the X-axis
represents the cumulative elapsed quantum execution time, and
color tracks the AR computed after each classical optimizer
iteration. The elapsed time includes circuit compilation, tran-
spilation, initialization and loading, and the transfer of result
data to the classical computer for classical processing. It is a
realistic representation of the time that a user will experience
when executing a quantum circuit of this type. The time at
which the quality of result reaches an acceptable level is visible
in this plot and grows with circuit width.
In Figure 10, we show the error in AR (distance from opti-
mal) seen in the final iteration of each run of the benchmark
executed on our noisy quantum simulator. The benchmark
sweeps over a range of problem sizes, implemented with qubit
widths from 2 to 14, and executed 5 times to obtain variance.
This plot illustrates how the quality of the result degrades as
2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Number of Qubits
10 2
10 1
100
101
Cumulative Execution Times / iteration (s)
Elapsed
Quantum
Benchmark Results - Hydrogen Lattice (2) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator-230910-5r  Jan 30, 2024 23:58:40 UTC
qubits=14, shots=1000, radius=0.75, restarts=5
(a) Execution on Quantum Simulator
2 4 6 8 10 12
Number of Qubits
10 2
10 1
100
101
102
Cumulative Execution Times / iteration (s)
Elapsed
Quantum
Benchmark Results - Hydrogen Lattice (2) - Qiskit
Device=ibmq_guadalupe-230911-1  Jan 30, 2024 23:57:36 UTC
qubits=12, shots=1000, radius=0.75, restarts=1
(b) Execution on Hardware System
FIG. 11: A verage Execution and Elapsed Times per Iteration.
Here we show average execution and elapsed times per iteration of
the objective function, at each qubit width. On a quantum simulator
(a), the exponential growth of the quantum execution time is evi-
dent, while the elapsed time increment becomes less significant as
the quantum time increases. On a physical hardware system, IBM
Quantum ibmq_guadalupe (b), the quantum execution time increases
more slowly, a defining characteristic of a quantum system. ( Data
collected via cloud service.)
the problem size increases. This is roughly in line with expec-
tations, as the depth of the ansatz increases in proportion to
qubit width. The fidelities obtained with method (1) show a
similar degradation with problem size.
Another important perspective is in how the execution time
of the application changes as the problem size increases. Exe-
cution time on a classically implemented simulator is expected
to increase much more rapidly than on a computing system
implemented in hardware.
A bar chart showing average execution and elapsed time
per iteration of the objective function, at each qubit width, is
shown in Figure 11. These averages, and associated error bars,
are computed as a function of the array of time measurements
collected as the iterative algorithm progresses. Executed on
a noisy quantum simulator (a), the exponential growth of the
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 12 =====

12
quantum execution time is evident, while the increment in
elapsed time is a smaller fraction of the total as the quantum
time increases. On a representative physical hardware system,
e.g. ibmq_guadalupe, (b), the quantum execution time starts at
a larger value but increases much more slowly. The growth in
execution time is primarily due to the increase in circuit depth
which can be seen when running the method (1) benchmark.
The hydrogen lattice benchmark algorithm enables users
to define both the classical optimizer function governing the
iteration of the algorithm and the method by which angles
are specified within the ansatz. While not explored in this
manuscript, it is important to acknowledge that variations in
these parameters can yield markedly different outcomes. Main-
taining consistency in these parameters is imperative when
utilizing the benchmarks to compare performance across back-
end systems.
V . PROGRAM OPTIMIZA TION TECHNIQUES
In this section, we review advancements made within the
QED-C benchmark framework to allow the integration of cus-
tom program optimization functions into the execution pipeline
(i.e. circuit creation, compilation, transpilation, execution, mea-
surement processing). We demonstrate the impact that such
options can have on benchmark results, using optional third-
party tools that have newly become available.
We analyze the impact of three program optimization tech-
niques, using the new execution control features added to the
benchmark framework. First, we consider state preparation and
measurement error mitigation, employed through the “Sampler”
primitive recently added to the Qiskit library [64]. Second, we
explore approximate circuit resynthesis, implemented via the
open-source toolkit TKET [65]. Third, we consider a form of
deterministic error suppression, available through Fire Opal
and via native integration with Qiskit Runtime primitives [66].
For each of these, we evaluate the effect on the fidelity of the re-
sult data returned to the user and the impact on total application
performance, including execution run-time.
A. Error Mitigation with Qiskit Sampler
Error mitigation has been shown to be an effective technique
for improving the performance of quantum program execu-
tion [67, 68]. However, there are limits to the effectiveness of
these techniques [69]. In particular, there is a trade-off in the
improvement in result quality and the total time taken to exe-
cute all the required circuits, while the degree of improvement
can depend on the device used and the circuit types tested [70].
In this section, we study the Qiskit Runtime Sampler Prim-
itive [64], a feature of the Qiskit library that performs error
mitigation automatically after circuit execution, and before
data are returned to the caller. The Sampler makes use of
functions from a library called “mthree” [ 71, 72], short for
matrix-free measurement mitigation. The mthree library uses
calibrated measures of error rate variability in the components
0
5
10
15
20
25
30Avg Execution Time (sec)
Elapsed
Quantum
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
Hellinger
Normalized
Benchmark Results - Quantum Fourier Transform (1) - Qiskit
Device=ibm_brisbane-240212-res-0  Feb 13, 2024 23:23:43 UTC
(a) QFT (1) Execution - Resilience Level 0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60Avg Execution Time (sec)
Elapsed
Quantum
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
Hellinger
Normalized
Benchmark Results - Quantum Fourier Transform (1) - Qiskit
Device=ibm_brisbane-240212-res-1  Feb 13, 2024 23:23:58 UTC
(b) QFT (1) Execution - Resilience Level 1
FIG. 12: Execution of QFT (1) Benchmark using Sampler . The
elapsed and quantum execution times are shown, with fidelity results,
from executing the QFT (1) benchmark using the Qiskit Sampler
Primitive on the IBM Quantum ibm_brisbane backend (1000 shots).
In (a), the circuits were executed using resilience level 0, in which no
error mitigation is applied. In (b), the circuits were executed with error
mitigation level 1, which applies dynamical decoupling to the circuits
and mthree error mitigation automatically. With resilience level 1,
fidelity is improved by up to 14% at small qubit counts, but execution
times are about 2X larger. (Data collected via cloud service.)
of a target quantum computing system to recover missing fi-
delity from measurement data. This can compensate for SPAM
errors, returning a quasi-probability distribution of bitstrings.
The Sampler may also perform multiple executions of the cir-
cuit and uses a heuristic algorithm in an attempt to achieve the
highest fidelity of execution.
The Sampler provides a default error mitigation level, re-
ferred to as resilience level 1, which activates the mthree error
mitigation functions. Setting the resilience level to 0 disables
error mitigation and returns the uncorrected measurement dis-
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 13 =====

13
tribution. We enable this optimization when executing the
benchmarks by specifying an option that invokes the Sampler
primitive with the desired resilience level.
We chose the Sampler for its ease of use in activating this
error mitigation feature. Alternatively, the QED-C bench-
marks can be programmatically configured to execute any user-
defined post-processing function, such as mthree, immediately
after executing each quantum circuit to apply corrections to
the measured data and improve the quality of result. Mthree
has been studied previously with this alternate approach and
shown to produce statistically significant improvements in the
measured fidelity of the QED-C benchmarks [73].
In Figure 12, we contrast the quality of the results and execu-
tion times that are observed when the circuits of the benchmark
suite are executed using the Sampler, with and without error
mitigation configured. For one representative benchmark pro-
gram, the QFT (1), the improvement in fidelity is visible for
circuits of qubit widths ranging from 2 to 8 qubits. The average
Hellinger fidelity, normalized fidelity, elapsed, and execution
times for each circuit group are compared across the range of
qubit widths using the provided benchmark plots. The first plot
(a) shows the results of executing without enabling error miti-
gation, while the second plot (b) shows the improvement when
mitigation is enabled. For example, at 5 qubits, the normalized
fidelity improves from 0.415 to 0.475 when the resilience level
is set to 1, a gain of about 14%.
The introduction of classical post-processing into the exe-
cution pipeline has a cost in terms of the total run-time for
the execution of the circuit. Our benchmark framework pro-
vides a standard mechanism for collecting execution time on
a backend quantum device and the total elapsed or wall-clock
time which includes classical computation and data transfer
time (described in our prior work [15].) For circuits executed
with Qiskit, the elapsed time telapsed is the sum of circuit com-
pilation time tcompile, queue time tqueue, time to load the circuit
into the control system tload, execution time on the quantum
backend tquantum, and time required to classically compute error
mitigation tmitigate as in Equation 10.
telapsed = tcompile + tqueue + tload + tquantum + tmitigate (10)
Quantum execution time tquantum is the only metric that is re-
liably returned in the Qiskit result record, although the method
of timing may di ffer across backend providers. When the
Sampler is used with resilience level 1, a portion of the error
mitigation processing time is included in tquantum, while the
remainder is captured by the benchmark framework in telapsed.
As a result, both the elapsed time and the quantum execution
time increase when error mitigation is applied. Currently, we
do not have a mechanism to partition the time into all of its
components with more granularity than this.
In the QFT (1) example presented in Figure 12, the time for
execution with error mitigation enabled is about 2-3X greater
on average than without, depending on the qubit width of the
circuit. For example, at 6 qubits, the total elapsed time telapsed
increases from 51s to 129s with resilience level set to 1. At this
width, the quantum execution time component tquantum shows
an increase from 18s to 42s.
2 4 6 8 10 12
Number of Qubits
0
10
20
30
40
50
60Error in Accuracy Ratio (%)
Benchmark Results - Hydrogen Lattice (2) - Qiskit
Device=ibmq_guadalupe-230910-0  Feb 13, 2024 23:56:35 UTC
qubits=12, shots=1000, radius=0.75, restarts=1
(a) Hydrogen Lattice Accuracy Error - Resilience Level 0
2 4 6 8 10 12
Number of Qubits
0
10
20
30
40
50
60Error in Accuracy Ratio (%)
Benchmark Results - Hydrogen Lattice (2) - Qiskit
Device=ibmq_guadalupe-230911-1  Feb 13, 2024 23:49:56 UTC
qubits=12, shots=1000, radius=0.75, restarts=1
(b) Hydrogen Lattice Accuracy Error - Resilience Level 1
FIG. 13: Accuracy Improvement for Hydrogen Lattice Bench-
mark using Sampler . Here we display the percentage error in an
application-specific metric, the accuracy ratio, that is computed in the
final iteration of the Hydrogen Lattice benchmark when executed on
the IBM Quantum ibmq_guadalupe system. In plot (a), the error is
16% and 19% at 2 and 4 qubit widths, respectively. In plot (b), the
error has been reduced with error mitigation to about 1% and 11%.
The level of improvement appears to diminish at larger problem sizes
(Data collected via cloud service.)
As another example, Figure 13 illustrates an improvement
in the accuracy ratio obtained when the Hydrogen Lattice
benchmark (section IV) is run with error mitigation enabled
via the Sampler. This benchmark uses a hybrid algorithm that
executes a set of quantum circuits repeatedly, wherein error
mitigation is applied to the measurement results after each
iteration. In (a), we observe that without error mitigation, the
error in the accuracy ratio ranges from 16% to 30% for small
qubit widths. However, in (b), we see that the error in accuracy
ratio is reduced to a range of 1% to 23% for small problem
sizes, ranging from 2 to 6 qubits. At larger qubit widths, there
is no noticeable improvement in the accuracy ratio.
B. Quantum Circuit Transformation with TKET
The QED-C benchmark circuits are typically executed using
default methods for compiling and mapping them to target
systems, sometimes with API-specific options, such as the
resilience level discussed in an earlier section. In this section,
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 14 =====

14
we illustrate an enhancement made to the benchmark execution
pipeline that enables the exploration of custom techniques for
preparing the circuits before their execution. A new benchmark
API option permits a user to invoke a custom transformer
function on each circuit before it is executed.
Here, we make use of an open-source toolkit, TKET (ac-
cessed via the python package pytket) [65], to perform program
transformations on the benchmark circuits prior to execution.
This permits us to explore the impact that such transformations
have on benchmark algorithms that have differing characteris-
tics. This exercise revealed weaknesses in some of the bench-
marks, where our algorithmic benchmark examples turned out
to compile to much fewer gates than the standard algorith-
mic circuits. We mention several examples below and plan to
investigate more complicated circuits to address this.
It is expected that transformation passes on benchmark cir-
cuits will a ffect the performance when running application-
oriented benchmarks [74], as the resulting circuits may be more
or less vulnerable to noise. Limits on the optimization tech-
niques permitted when benchmarking have been explored [75],
and prevent the use of some techniques. Here, we demand
only that the optimization passes utilized are clearly reported
in the results of these benchmarks, that the optimizations used
are classically efficient to implement, and that barriers in the
circuit are respected.
In the remainder of this section, we examine the impact the
transformation technique “approximate circuit resynthesis”.
Approximate resynthesis proceeds by merging sequences of
two-qubit gates acting on the same two qubits into a single two-
qubit unitary, and resynthesizing the resulting unitary. Two-
qubit operations can always be synthesized using at most three
CX gates and single-qubit gates, by a result known as the KAK
or Cartan decomposition [76]. The set of unitaries that can be
generated by two CX gates and single-qubit gates is smaller
than the set of all 2 qubit unitaries, but when such a circuit
implements a unitary that is “close enough” to the desired one
it may be preferable to use that approximate decomposition
instead of the perfect one [ 4]. This is true if the error that
results from using an approximate decomposition is greater
than the error that would be introduced from implementing an
additional CX gate on a noisy quantum computer. Approximate
synthesis typically improves performance, since shorter depth
circuits compensate for inaccuracies introduced by altering
the unitary considered (by removing gates). Here we use the
KAKDecomposition pass, available through pytket [65] as a
means of performing such an approximate resynthesis.
A function is defined to implement the approximate resyn-
thesis transformation on an input circuit and return a modified
circuit. This function is specified via the exec_options argu-
ment of a benchmark’s run method. When the benchmark is
executed, the transformation is applied to each circuit prior to
its execution. Both the fidelity score achieved on the bench-
mark as well as the execution time are metrics of concern.
In Figure 14 and Figure 15, we show the fidelities and exe-
cution times obtained for two of the benchmarks, Hamiltonian
Simulation and Hidden Shift, when executed over widths of 2
to 12 qubits, with approximate resynthesis applied. The Hamil-
tonian Simulation results are significantly improved while the
0
5
10
15Avg Execution Time (sec)
Elapsed
Quantum
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
Hellinger
Normalized
Benchmark Results - Hamiltonian Simulation - Qiskit
Device=Fake Mumbai_pytket  Oct 12, 2023 18:41:24 UTC
(a) Hamiltonian Simulation with TKET Approximate Resynthesis
0
2
4
6
8
10
12Avg Execution Time (sec)
Elapsed
Quantum
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
Hellinger
Normalized
Benchmark Results - Hamiltonian Simulation - Qiskit
Device=Fake Mumbai_qiskit  Oct 12, 2023 18:41:14 UTC
(b) Hamiltonian Simulation with default optimization level 3
FIG. 14: Approximate Resynthesis TKET Circuit Optimization
applied to Hamiltonian Simulation. Hellinger and normalized fideli-
ties are displayed over circuit width for the Hamiltonian Simulation
benchmark circuits executed on the Qiskit Aer simulator, using a
Fake Melbourne noise model. A significant increase in execution
fidelity is visible in plot (a) as the approximate resynthesis algorithm
produces circuits of shorter lengths, compensating for a decrease in
the accuracy of the gate representation of the problem.
Hidden Shift is essentially unchanged.
The Hamiltonian simulation implementation benefits the
most from the approximate resynthesis since all two-qubit gates
correspond to small angle (π/300) ZZ interactions. In current-
generation quantum computers implementing such small in-
teractions actually adds more errors to the overall circuit than
simply skipping the gates. This is seen by comparing the av-
erage fidelity between the small angle ZZ interactions and the
identity gate to the fidelity of typical two-qubit gates. The use
of approximate resynthesis is generically applicable, not just
to Hamiltonian Simulation, but the advantage is particularly
notable in this case due to the small angle gates. Other QED-C
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 15 =====

15
0
2
4
6
8
10
12Avg Execution Time (sec)
Elapsed
Quantum
2 4 6 8 10 12
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
Hellinger
Normalized
Benchmark Results - Hidden Shift - Qiskit
Device=Fake Mumbai_pytket  Oct 12, 2023 18:41:22 UTC
(a) Hidden Shift with TKET Approximate Resynthesis.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12Avg Execution Time (sec)
Elapsed
Quantum
2 4 6 8 10 12
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
Hellinger
Normalized
Benchmark Results - Hidden Shift - Qiskit
Device=Fake Mumbai_qiskit  Oct 12, 2023 18:41:12 UTC
(b) Hidden Shift with default optimization level 3
FIG. 15: Approximate Resynthesis TKET Circuit Optimization
applied to Hidden Shift. Hellinger and normalized fidelities are
displayed over circuit width for the Hidden Shift benchmark circuits
executed on the Qiskit Aer simulator, using a Fake Melbourne noise
model. No increase in execution fidelity is seen in plot (a) as the
approximate resynthesis algorithm is unable to regroup any of the
small number of gates in the Hidden Shift circuit, making no change
to circuit depth, resulting in no improvement in fidelity.
benchmarks that benefit include QFT (1) and (2), quantum
phase estimation, as well as HHL and the Hydrogen Lattice
examples discussed above. Conducting such transformations
comes at an additional, but reasonable time cost, as expected.
In future work, we plan to implement other variants of Hamil-
tonian simulation circuits (and other benchmark circuits) that
may limit the impact of such techniques.
Conversely, there is little change in performance in the case
of the Hidden shift class of circuits, as seen in Figure 15.
This particular class of circuits contains two-qubit sub-circuits
separated by barriers. These two-qubit subcircuits contain only
a single two-qubit gate between barriers, and therefore do not
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12Circuit Width
QV=8
Hidden Shift
Hamiltonian Simulation
Amplitude Estimation
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=Fake_Melbourne_pytket  Oct 05, 2023 03:35:23 UTC
(a) TKET circuit optimization - Approximate resynthesis.
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12Circuit Width
QV=8
Hidden Shift
Hamiltonian Simulation
Amplitude Estimation
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=Fake_Melbourne_qiskit  Oct 05, 2023 03:35:18 UTC
(b) Default Qiskit circuit optimization - level 3.
FIG. 16: V olumetric plot of several benchmark circuits These
circuits were executed on the Qiskit Aer simulator, using the Fake
Melbourne noise model. Quantum volume on the Melbourne system
(now retired) was measured to be 8, suggesting that circuits wider than
3 qubits will have a low probability of success. Here, the impact of
using the TKET approximate resynthesis method is visible for both the
Hamiltonian Simulation and the Amplitude Estimation benchmark.
benefit from resynthesis passes leaving the fidelity unchanged.
In Figure 16, we present a volumetric plot of the results from
executing three of the benchmarks with and without the use of
the approximate resynthesis transformation. The improvement
in the Hamiltonian Simulation and the lack of improvement in
Hidden Shift fidelities is visible between the two. While we
do not include the detailed bar charts here, our analysis shows
that Amplitude Estimation (plotted in Figure 16) and Monte
Carlo (not plotted) also benefit from resynthesis across three-
qubit sub-circuits (also available in pytket). In those tests,
the target state is created only over two qubits with several
subcircuits that consist of controlled operations between the
target state and the ancilla qubit (three total qubits). Three
qubit resynthesis significantly reduces the two-qubit gate count
in these cases. In future work, we will scale the target state
size in these examples with the number of qubits to avoid such
a high reduction.
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 16 =====

16
C. Custom Execution Pipeline with Fire Opal
In this section, we discuss another enhancement developed
for this work, a custom “executor” function that permits a
user to take complete control of the execution pipeline. This
custom function receives an un-processed benchmark circuit
object, processes and executes it under user control, and returns
measurement results post-processed as desired.
To illustrate this enhancement, we developed a custom ex-
ecutor function that employs the Fire Opal package from Q-
CTRL [66] to perform transpilation, optimization, execution,
and mitigation of errors during the execution of each bench-
mark circuit. The Fire Opal package is intended to be agnostic
to the hardware backend and to the type of algorithm executed.
Given an arbitrary algorithm and hardware properties, such
as device topology, connectivity, and backend data on qubit
quality, Fire Opal uses a deterministic approach to improve
quantum hardware performance and suppress non-Markovian
noise in the system without the use of sampling or randomiza-
tion methods (described in [77].)
Here, we present an analysis of the results of executing two
of the QED-C benchmarks within the Q-CTRL environment,
configured to use this custom executor function. To illustrate
the types of operations that can be performed in a custom
executor function, we describe the error-suppressing workflow
implemented for Fire Opal, and performed on each benchmark
circuit:
1. A quantum circuit (Qiskit QuantumCircuit object), along
with execution parameters, is passed to the function,
where a Fire Opal front-end compiler reduces the circuit
depth and transpiles it to the backend device topology
using a sequence of mathematical identities. Fire Opal
also accepts OpenQASM circuit definition.
2. An error-aware hardware mapping function determines
the best circuit layout to maximize performance on the
physical device, using knowledge of qubit coherences
and gate errors that typically vary across the device.
Dynamical decoupling pulses are embedded to suppress
crosstalk using a context-aware ranking protocol.
3. If the gate fidelities are lower than the coherence limit
as calculated by the T1 and T2 times provided by the
backend, then optimal pulse control ([ 78, 79] is au-
tonomously deployed to replace the hardware-level in-
structions for the specified gate.
4. The user circuit is converted to the API supported by
the specified backend (i.e. Pyquil, Qiskit pulse, AWS
Braket, etc). The circuit is then executed and the results
are returned for further processing.
5. In post-processing, measurement errors from the ob-
tained probability distribution are eliminated using a
protocol that utilizes a set of pre-measured confusion
matrices. The details of this error mitigation protocol
are available in Appendix C-4 of Ref.[77]
FIG. 17: Benchmark execution on the 27Q IBM Quantum Algiers
backend. (In logscale) (a) Normalized fidelity of the BV (1) circuits
executed using default sampler primitive (black) is below 1% beyond
18Q and is 0% for 26Q and 27Q. Using the error suppression in Q-
CTRL Fire Opal (blue) gives fidelities ranging from 25% down to
5% for 27 qubits. (b) Normalized fidelities for QFT (2) using default
sample (black) shows an exponential decay to 0.01% for 14Q. Using
Fire Opal (blue) gives fidelities ranging from 50% (for 7Q) to 9% (for
14Q). (Data provided by Q-CTRL.)
To understand the impact of error-suppression techniques on
performance, we compare the result fidelity of the Bernstein-
Vazirani BV (1) and the QFT (2) benchmarks run on the IBM
quantum processor ibm_algiers via the default sampler prim-
itive (black) and Q-CTRL’s Fire Opal software (blue) in Fig-
ure 17. In this experiment, we focus specifically on circuits
with increasing qubit widths, where the result fidelity obtained
with default settings is very low. We highlight the improve-
ment in result fidelity that can be obtained in this region of
circuit widths when the Fire Opal executor function is invoked.
The default sampler primitive includes an optimization level
= 3 and resilience level = 1. We pass exactly the same input
circuits to both methods.
For BV (1), we examine results from 18 qubits to 27 qubits.
We modified this benchmark to use a target string of all “1”s,
instead of random inputs, as it results in the largest depth
circuits. The fidelity of the BV (1) circuits executed using the
default sampler primitive (black) is below 1% beyond 18Q and
we never observe the target bitstring for 26Q and 27Q over
10,000 shots. Using the error suppression in Q-CTRL Fire
Opal (blue) gives improved fidelities ranging from 25% to 5%
for 27 qubits.
For QFT (2), we examine results from 7 to 14 qubits, where
the default result fidelity is below 10% and as low as 0.01% for
14Q. Fire Opal (blue) gives improved fidelities ranging from
50% (for 7Q) down to 9% (for 14Q). It is important to note
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 17 =====

17
that the magnitude of improvement in fidelity varies with the
type and size of circuits. Typically, benefits are expected to
increase with circuit width and depth [77].
This demonstrates how the QED-C benchmark framework
allows users to test additional error suppression features like
Fire Opal to improve result fidelity. However, in this exercise,
we do not present measurements of the run-time cost of this
additional processing. We plan to do this in a future work.
VI. BENCHMARKING MACHINE LEARNING
APPLICA TIONS
Applications in machine learning have widespread utility,
revolutionizing data analysis and decision-making across var-
ious domains, and recently being extended to creative tasks
as well. However, the heavy computational requirements of
classical machine learning make it an attractive area for the
development of quantum approaches. While early quantum ma-
chine learning algorithms required large numbers of qubits and
gates which are beyond the capabilities of current generation
quantum computers, much recent algorithmic development has
focused on near-term heuristic approaches which are possible
to test on real quantum hardware.
In this section, we present a framework for benchmarking
these emerging quantum machine learning algorithms, using
a representative quantum algorithm for binary classification
of images within a large dataset. While there have been many
benchmark frameworks developed for quantum machine learn-
ing applications [13, 80–82], our work generalizes an approach
to be consistent with our benchmarking of other classes of
applications. This is designed to provide consistency and val-
idation of results across application domains and to enable
performance-driven exploration of new types of machine learn-
ing applications.
A. Quantum Machine Learning
Machine learning involves analyzing existing data to make
predictions when presented with new information. Some com-
monly encountered examples of machine learning are image
and speech recognition, product recommendation, and anomaly
detection. Machine learning can be supervised, that is, based
on a labeled dataset, or unsupervised, where the dataset is
unlabeled. A further distinction can be made between discrimi-
native, which seeks to maximize the ability of an algorithm to
assign a class to unseen data, and generative learning, which
seeks to produce new data that could plausibly belong to the
original dataset.
Quantum computers provide a new paradigm for machine
learning algorithms. Near-term quantum machine learning
generally relies on using parameterized circuits to efficiently
capture the correlations between different variables in a dataset
which can be optimized according to a desired outcome. The-
oretical work suggests favorable generalization properties for
such quantum models [ 83–85] and arguments for quantum
advantage are presented based on the expressivity of these
models [86–88].
Notable experimental results in quantum machine learn-
ing include training quantum-enhanced generative adversarial
networks (GANs) on a variety of image generation and mul-
tivariate problems [ 88–92], and using quantum algorithms,
transformers, or ensembles to perform image classification
tasks of varying complexity [93–95]. In addition to the poten-
tial for quantum advantage, theoretical and numerical work
has established the possibility of effective training of certain
classes of parameterized quantum circuits, including Quantum
Convolutional Neural Networks [96] and orthogonal quantum
circuits [97].
B. Image Recognition Quantum Algorithm
For our benchmark, we selected a simple binary image clas-
sification problem that uses a database consisting of images of
two digits, 7 or 9, as the source of data. Each image is labeled
to identify the class, 7 or 9, to which it belongs. The chal-
lenge is to execute and benchmark a quantum algorithm that
can recognize the class of an unknown image. To accomplish
this, we first use a subset of the images in ‘training’ mode by
repeatedly encoding each of these images into an ansatz circuit
and executing a variational algorithm to search for parameters
that maximize the classification accuracy of the images. These
parameters can later be used to identify any unknown encoded
image by re-executing the circuit with these parameters.
In the algorithm used, each data point (image) is uploaded to
the quantum computer one at a time, after which it is acted upon
by the parameterized quantum circuit. After measurement, the
output is classically processed and submitted to a loss function.
This procedure effectively encodes a Fourier series in the data,
whose coefficients depend on the parameterized circuit and
frequencies on the data encoding procedure [98]. Since Fourier
functions are known to be universal function approximators
quantum models can be used to model any kind of data.
Specifically, the classification of the k-th image with pixel
values{i, p(k)
i }, where i∈ [1, n0] is the pixel index andp(k)
i is the
pixel value which lies between 0 and 1, proceeds as follows:
(i) Compressing the image using Principal Component
Analysis to a vector of size equal to the numbern of avail-
able qubits:{p(k)
i }→{ q(k)
j } with j∈ [1, n] for n< n0.
(ii) Loading into a quantum state with n qubits
using product state encoding,
Ψ0({q(k)
j })
E
=
Qn
j=1 exp

i2πq(k)
j X j

|0... 0⟩
(iii) Acting on it with a parameterized unitary U(θ) based
on the quantum convolutional neural network [99, 100]
with the circuit tapering towards the 0-th qubit to give
the state U(⃗θ)
Ψ({q(k)
j })
E
(iv) Measuring operator Z0 (i.e. Pauli Z acting on the 0-th
qubit) on the resulting state and converting that mea-
surement into a prediction for the image class: mk =
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 18 =====

18
f
D
Ψ0({q(k)
j })
 U(⃗θ)†Z0U(⃗θ)
Ψ0({q(k)
j })
E
, where f is a
simple classical function
While training the classifier, the prediction is used to cal-
culate a mean square loss function for image k against the
provided label yk, lk =|yk− mk|2 which is input to a mean loss
for the whole training dataset L = 1
Ntrain
PNtrain
k=1 lk, where Ntrain is
the size of the training dataset. This loss function is used by
an optimizer to iteratively change the parameters to minimize
the loss. While in validation (also known as testing) mode, the
prediction is used to calculate how well the classifier performs.
Finally, the machine learning algorithm can be deployed in
inference mode on new data.
C. Image Recognition Benchmark Implementation
This image recognition benchmark makes use of a publicly
available MNIST image database, ‘mnist_784’ [ 101]. The
digits in this database are size-normalized and centered in a
fixed-size 28x28 pixel image. We use the OpenML ‘sklearn’
python package [102] to load the database and extract only the
images for the digits 7 and 9 along with their labels. From
a specified number of images to process, we select 80% for
a training set, with the remaining 20% used for testing the
effectiveness of the training.
Once the images have been loaded, the benchmark can be ex-
ecuted in three different modes, or ‘methods’, each exercising
a different aspect of the benchmark. All three modes produce
a series of plots displaying the benchmarking results which are
described below.
Method (1) is designed to characterize the result fidelity of
ansatz execution, as with the other iterative algorithms in the
suite (e.g. maxcut, hydrogen-lattice). The quantum circuit
that encodes a single image for classification is executed with
random input parameters and its output is evaluated against the
output from an ideal simulator. This can be done for different
numbers of qubits, and it produces results similar to the non-
iterative benchmarks, including a volumetric plot and bar charts
displaying execution times, circuit depths, and fidelities.
Method (2) is the ‘training pass’, in which the images in
the training subset are processed by the variational algorithm
to find optimal parameters for the given problem dataset. Al-
gorithm 2 outlines the pseudocode for the operation of this
training mode.
The benchmark loops over a specified range of qubit widths,
as in other benchmarks. For each width, and under the control
of a classical optimizer, the training images undergo classical
pre-processing and are compressed so that they can be encoded
into a small number of qubits at that width. For each image,
an ansatz circuit, with image features encoded, is created and
executed with trial parameters. An aggregate loss, expressed
as a distance from the expected classifications, is calculated
for all the images in the set. This loss value is returned to
the optimizer which attempts to find the parameters for the
ansatz that result in the lowest loss. The benchmark tracks
the progress of the algorithm as it attempts to converge on the
lowest loss value.
Algorithm2 Benchmark Algorithm for Quantum Image Recog-
nition (Training Mode, method 2)
1: target← backend_id
2: initialize_metrics()
3: image_data, image_label← load_mnist_data()
4: image_data_batch, image_label_batch ←
create_batch(batch_size, image_data, image_label)
5: for qubit_count← min_count, max_count do
6: params[α]← random(num_params)
7: while num_iteration not done do ▷ minimizing
8: for data_point← image_data_batch do
9: f eature_map_circuit ←
create_ f eature_map(qubit_count, data_point)
10: parameterized_circuit ←
create_ansatz_circuit(qubit_count)
11: mergedcircuit ←
compose_circuits( f eature_map_circuit, parameterized_circuit)
12: cached_circuit← compile_circuit(mergedcircuit)
13: circuit← apply _params(cached_circuit, params)
14: counts← execute(target, circuit, num_shots)
15: prediction← calculate_prediction(counts)
16: prediction_batch← append (prediction)
17: end for
18: loss, accuracy ←
loss_ f unction(prediction_batch, image_data_batch)
19: store_iteration_metrics(loss, accuracy)
20: params[α]← optimize(params[α])
21: image_data_batch, image_label_batch ←
update_batch(batch_size, image_data, image_label) ▷ no
repetition
22: done← True if iterations completed
23: end while
24: compute_and_store_restart_metrics()
25: compute_and_store_group_metrics()
26: end for
The Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Approximation
(SPSA) optimizer is chosen for its ability to perform multi-
parameter optimization where the number of function calls is
independent of the number of parameters. This is important
here since many images need to be evaluated at each optimizer
iteration. In principle, the loss function could be evaluated
as an average over all the training images at each iteration.
However, this would make training very expensive. In practice,
we find that a stochastic sampling technique, where a number
of images equal to a fixed batch size are evaluated at each
iteration of the optimizer works just as well. In this work, we
use a default batch size of 50.
Method (3) is the ‘validation’ pass, in which the benchmark
performs inference on the remaining images, known as the
test dataset. The ansatz is executed once for each of the im-
ages, using the parameters obtained during the training pass.
The distance of the resulting classifications from the expected
classifications results in a loss that acts as a measure of how
well this quantum classification algorithm works when trained.
This value can be compared against classical solutions using
the same problem set.
While the overall framework remains the same as for other
variational algorithms, some key differences distinguish this
benchmark. First, the classical data, in this case images, need
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 19 =====

19
0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
Iterations
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.28Training Loss
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Cumulative Quantum Execution Time (s)
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9Training Accuracy
Benchmark Results - Image Recognition (2) - Qiskit
Device=statevector_simulator  Jan 04, 2024 00:48:34 UTC
qubits=4, shots=1000, ansatz=qcnn uniform, method=2
0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
Iterations
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90T est Accuracy
0 10 20 30 40
Cumulative Quantum Execution Time (s)
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90T est Accuracy
Benchmark Results - Image Recognition (3) - Qiskit
Device=statevector_simulator  Jan 04, 2024 00:58:52 UTC
qubits=4, shots=1000, ansatz=qcnn uniform, method=3
FIG. 18: Progression of Training and Test Accuracies. Here we show results from executing the Image Recognition benchmark methods 2
and 3, the training pass and the testing pass, respectively. As the training progresses, the classification accuracy increases, and the loss decreases
for both the training and test datasets. The benchmarking suite evaluates the mean training loss after every iteration of the optimizer. The test
loss can be calculated after the training at parameter values that are stored periodically after a set number of iterations. Here, 200 images are
used for training and 50 for testing.
to be effectively compressed before loading into the quantum
computer. Secondly, a large number of images need to be
processed at each iteration corresponding to which a large
number of quantum circuits need to be run on the quantum
computer or simulator. Finally, even validating the e fficacy
of the training involves running the classification algorithm
on a test dataset that itself requires many calls to the quantum
computer or simulator.
D. Simulation Results and Analysis
The benchmark was tested in simulation using the Qiskit
statevector simulator. Some of the output graphs are shown
in Figure 18 - Figure 20. In Figure 18 (top), the measured
loss function decreases as the training of the classifier circuit
progress. At the same time, the accuracy of the circuit in
classifying images of the training dataset increases. The cor-
responding behavior is also seen on the test dataset (bottom).
The test accuracy is measured less frequently than the training
accuracy since it is not essential for training, but rather a mea-
sure of how it is progressing. We see that the curves oscillate
around an increasing or decreasing overall trend. This oscilla-
tion is due to the stochastic nature of the batch construction as
well as the use of the SPSA optimizer.
Figure 19 shows the training accuracy that is achieved for
4 through 10 qubits after 200 iterations. Here the maximum
training accuracy is defined as an average of the 5 highest
accuracies that are achieved on the training dataset during the
training. The accuracy overall trends downwards as the number
of qubits increases, indicating that models with a larger number
of qubits take longer to train. Additionally, the models with
4 and 8 qubits have increased accuracy which is a result of
using the quantum convolutional neural network, which has a
symmetry when the number of qubits is a power of 2.
Figure 20 shows the training times for 4 through 10 qubits
for executing 200 iterations of the optimizer. It is notable that
for execution on the simulator, the elapsed time is considerably
longer than the quantum time, indicating that more optimized
software for handling the construction and execution of param-
eterized quantum circuits could have a significant impact on
the feasibility of quantum machine learning which involves
running batches of such circuits.
The benchmarking framework allows us to test the effect of
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 20 =====

20
4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Number of Qubits
0
20
40
60
80T esting Accuracy (%)
Benchmark Results - Image Recognition (3) - Qiskit
Device=statevector_simulator  Jan 04, 2024 00:58:55 UTC
qubits=10, shots=1000, restarts=1
FIG. 19: Maximum Training Accuracies. Here we show the ac-
curacy of the algorithm on the training dataset as a function of the
number of qubits when the number of training iterations is fixed at
200 and the size of the training dataset is 200.
4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Number of Qubits
0
10
20
30
40
50
60Cumulative Execution Times / iteration (s)
Elapsed
Quantum
Benchmark Results - Image Recognition (3) - Qiskit
Device=statevector_simulator  Jan 04, 2024 00:58:55 UTC
qubits=10, shots=1000, restarts=1
FIG. 20: Training Times. Here we show the execution time of the
algorithm on the training dataset as a function of the number of qubits
when the number of training iterations is fixed at 200 and the size of
the training dataset is 200.
different hyperparameters on the training. For instance, Fig-
ure 21 shows the effect of the size of the training dataset. The
top panel shows the accuracy on the test dataset when the num-
ber of training images is fixed at 200, while the middle one
shows the results when all the available images in MNIST for
our binary classification problem that are not in the test dataset,
numbering 14201, are used. We see that for the smaller dataset
size, the test accuracies are larger for 4 qubits, while the accu-
racy of the 8 qubit ansatz stays about the same in both cases.
In the bottom panel, we see that the accuracy for the larger
dataset for 4 qubits increases when we increase the number of
iterations, indicating that the larger dataset size makes it harder
for the optimizer to converge at a fixed number of iterations.
VII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Cloud-accessible quantum computers are attracting a wide
audience of potential users, but the challenges in understanding
their capabilities create a significant barrier to the adoption of
quantum computing. The QED-C Application-Oriented Bench-
FIG. 21: Effect of Training Dataset Size. Here is an example of the
hyperparameter exploration that can be done with the benchmarking
framework. The top panel shows the accuracy on the test dataset when
Ntrain = 200, while the middle panel shows the results when Ntrain =
14201. For both the top and middle panels, the number of iterations
is 200. The bottom panel shows the results when Ntrain = 14201 and
number of iterations is 400.
mark suite makes it easy for new users to assess a machine’s
ability to implement applications, and its volumetric visualiza-
tion of the results is designed to be simple and intuitive. In this
manuscript, we described several enhancements made to this
benchmark suite. This is an ongoing effort, established under
the direction of the QED-C (Quantum Economic Development
Consortium), with work organized and managed by QED-C
members within the broad community of quantum computing
system providers and quantum software developers.
In enhancing the suite and developing new benchmarks, we
have expanded the framework to o ffer greater control over
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 21 =====

21
the properties and configuration of the applications used as
benchmarks. It makes it possible, not only to increase coverage
of the execution landscape but to explore various algorithmic
variations. One reason to do this is to determine whether
there are certain applications or variants of them that perform
better on a specific class of hardware. We anticipate that our
work will facilitate the adoption of quantum computing, and
encourage economic development within the industry.
In this work, we introduced several new benchmarks, the
first based on a scalable version of the HHL linear equation
solver that illustrates how variations on the algorithm impact
its volumetric profile and add coverage to the benchmark suite.
The second evaluates the performance of a VQE algorithm that
finds the ground state energy of a hydrogen lattice simulation,
with a new methodology for analyzing the quality /run-time
trade-off and two new normalized measures of chemical accu-
racy, the accuracy ratio, and the solution quality.
This was followed by a review of new options for insert-
ing custom circuit preparation, execution, and error mitiga-
tion procedures. We show how these enable the use of new
tools such as the Qiskit Sampler, TKET, and Q-CTRL’s Fire
Opal to improve the results obtained from running the bench-
mark results. Lastly, we presented an early-stage version of
a machine learning algorithm, a simple image classification
problem, that defines another application-specific measure and
executes many more circuits iteratively than does the VQE
benchmark.
The updated QED-C benchmarks provide extensive support
for measuring the run-time costs associated with the execution
of both simple and variational algorithms. In evaluating the
performance of quantum computers, a precise understanding
of the practical trade-o ffs in run-time cost versus quality of
solution is essential to evaluating the total cost of ownership
for a solution technology.
A primary goal of this e ffort is to identify ways in which
this highly flexible framework could be made available and
extended easily to new quantum applications. Surfacing these
benchmarks early offers potential users and investors the assur-
ance that progress is being made in advancing the technology.
To truly develop confidence in the technology, users must be
able to execute simple programs easily and gauge the perfor-
mance of these programs as the machine improves in perfor-
mance. That is the purpose of this suite of benchmarks and the
effort described in this paper.
Looking to the future, we envision proposals for additional
efforts to facilitate the exploration of algorithmic options and
their impact on performance in this continually evolving bench-
marking framework.
CODE A V AILABILITY
The code for the benchmark suite described in this work
is available at https://github.com/SRI-International/QC-App-
Oriented-Benchmarks. Detailed instructions are provided in
the repository.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The Quantum Economic Development Consortium (QED-
C), a group of commercial organizations, government institu-
tions, and academia formed a Technical Advisory Committee
(TAC) to study the landscape of standards development in quan-
tum technologies and to identify ways to encourage economic
development through standards. In this context, the Standards
TAC undertook to create the suite of Application-Oriented Per-
formance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing as an open
source project, with contributions from many members of the
QED-C involved in Quantum Computing. We thank the many
members of the QED-C for their valuable input in reviewing
and enhancing this work.
We acknowledge the use of IBM Quantum services for
this work. The views expressed are those of the authors
and do not reflect the o fficial policy or position of IBM or
the IBM Quantum team. IBM Quantum. https: //quantum-
computing.ibm.com/, 2023. We acknowledge Quantinuum
for contributing the results from their commercial H1-1 hard-
ware. We thank Q-CTRL for supplying the environment and
performing the execution of several of the QED-C benchmarks.
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 22 =====

22
[1] E. Knill, D. Leibfried, R. Reichle, J. Britton, R. B. Blakestad,
J. D. Jost, C. Langer, R. Ozeri, S. Seidelin, and D. J. Wineland.
Randomized benchmarking of quantum gates. Phys. Rev. A, 77:
012307, Jan 2008. doi:10.1103 /PhysRevA.77.012307. URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.77.0
12307.
[2] Easwar Magesan, J. M. Gambetta, and Joseph Emerson. Scal-
able and robust randomized benchmarking of quantum pro-
cesses. Phys. Rev. Lett. , 106:180504, May 2011. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.180504. URL https://link.aps
.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.180504.
[3] Robin Blume-Kohout, John King Gamble, Erik Nielsen, Ken-
neth Rudinger, Jonathan Mizrahi, Kevin Fortier, and Peter
Maunz. Demonstration of qubit operations below a rigorous
fault tolerance threshold with gate set tomography. Nat. Com-
mun., 8:14485, February 2017. doi:10.1038 /ncomms14485.
URL https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms1448
5.
[4] Andrew W. Cross, Lev S. Bishop, Sarah Sheldon, Paul D.
Nation, and Jay M. Gambetta. Validating quantum computers
using randomized model circuits. Physical Review A, 100(3),
sep 2019. doi:10.1103 /physreva.100.032328. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1103%2Fphysreva.100.032328.
[5] Sergio Boixo, Sergei V . Isakov, Vadim N. Smelyanskiy,
Ryan Babbush, Nan Ding, Zhang Jiang, Michael J. Bremner,
John M. Martinis, and Hartmut Neven. Characterizing quan-
tum supremacy in near-term devices. Nature Physics, 14(6):
595–600, Apr 2018. ISSN 1745-2481. doi:10.1038 /s41567-
018-0124-x. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s4156
7-018-0124-x .
[6] Timothy Proctor, Kenneth Rudinger, Kevin Young, Erik
Nielsen, and Robin Blume-Kohout. Measuring the capabil-
ities of quantum computers, 2020.
[7] Andrew Wack, Hanhee Paik, Ali Javadi-Abhari, Petar Jurce-
vic, Ismael Faro, Jay M. Gambetta, and Blake R. Johnson.
Quality, speed, and scale: three key attributes to measure the
performance of near-term quantum computers, 2021. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.14108.
[8] Nils Quetschlich, Lukas Burgholzer, and Robert Wille. MQT
Bench: Benchmarking Software and Design Automation Tools
for Quantum Computing. Quantum, 7:1062, July 2023. ISSN
2521-327X. doi:10.22331/q-2023-07-20-1062. URL https:
//doi.org/10.22331/q-2023-07-20-1062 .
[9] Teague Tomesh, Pranav Gokhale, Victory Omole, Gokul Sub-
ramanian Ravi, Kaitlin N. Smith, Joshua Viszlai, Xin-Chuan
Wu, Nikos Hardavellas, Margaret R. Martonosi, and Frederic T.
Chong. Supermarq: A scalable quantum benchmark suite,
2022.
[10] Koen Mesman, Zaid Al-Ars, and Matthias Möller. QPack:
Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithms as universal
benchmark for quantum computers, April 2022. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2103.17193.
[11] Huub Donkers, Koen Mesman, Zaid Al-Ars, and Matthias
Möller. Qpack scores: Quantitative performance metrics for
application-oriented quantum computer benchmarking, 2022.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.12142.
[12] Jernej Rudi Finzgar, Philipp Ross, Leonhard Holscher, Jo-
hannes Klepsch, and Andre Luckow. QUARK: A frame-
work for quantum computing application benchmarking. In
2022 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Com-
puting and Engineering (QCE) . IEEE, sep 2022. doi:
10.1109/qce53715.2022.00042. URL https://doi.org/
10.1109%2Fqce53715.2022.00042.
[13] Florian J. Kiwit, Marwa Marso, Philipp Ross, Carlos A. Riofrío,
Johannes Klepsch, and Andre Luckow. Application-oriented
benchmarking of quantum generative learning using quark,
2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.04082.
[14] Thomas Lubinski, Sonika Johri, Paul Varosy, Jeremiah Cole-
man, Luning Zhao, Jason Necaise, Charles H. Baldwin,
Karl Mayer, and Timothy Proctor. Application-oriented
performance benchmarks for quantum computing. IEEE
Transactions on Quantum Engineering , 4:1–32, 2023. doi:
10.1109/TQE.2023.3253761.
[15] Thomas Lubinski, Carleton Co ffrin, Catherine McGeoch,
Pratik Sathe, Joshua Apanavicius, and David E. Bernal Neira.
Optimization applications as quantum performance bench-
marks, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.02278.
[16] Standard Performance Evaluation Corporation, 2021. URL
https://spec.org/ . SPEC Benchmark Suite, accessed
2021-05-28.
[17] John L. Hennessy and Patterson. Computer Architecture: a
Quantitative Approach. Morgan Kaufmann, 2019.
[18] Alberto Peruzzo, Jarrod McClean, Peter Shadbolt, Man-Hong
Yung, Xiao-Qi Zhou, Peter J. Love, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, and
Jeremy L. O’Brien. A variational eigenvalue solver on a pho-
tonic quantum processor. Nature Communications, 5(1):1–7,
July 2014. ISSN 2041-1723. doi:10.1038 /ncomms5213.
[19] Edward Farhi, Jeffrey Goldstone, and Sam Gutmann. A quan-
tum approximate optimization algorithm, 2014.
[20] Ryan LaRose and Brian Coyle. Robust data encodings for
quantum classifiers. Phys. Rev. A, 102:032420, Sep 2020. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevA.102.032420. URL https://link.aps.o
rg/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.102.032420.
[21] Jwo-Sy Chen, Erik Nielsen, Matthew Ebert, V olkan Inlek, Ken-
neth Wright, Vandiver Chaplin, Andrii Maksymov, Eduardo
Páez, Amrit Poudel, Peter Maunz, and John Gamble. Bench-
marking a trapped-ion quantum computer with 29 algorithmic
qubits, 2023.
[22] Aram W. Harrow, Avinatan Hassidim, and Seth Lloyd. Quan-
tum algorithm for linear systems of equations. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
103:150502, Oct 2009. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.103.150502.
URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLe
tt.103.150502.
[23] Jay M Gambetta, AD Córcoles, Seth T Merkel, Blake R
Johnson, John A Smolin, Jerry M Chow, Colm A Ryan,
Chad Rigetti, S Poletto, Thomas A Ohki, et al. Characteri-
zation of addressability by simultaneous randomized bench-
marking. Phys. Rev. Lett. , 109(24):240504, 2012. URL
https://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.110
3/PhysRevLett.109.240504.
[24] Mohan Sarovar, Timothy Proctor, Kenneth Rudinger, Kevin
Young, Erik Nielsen, and Robin Blume-Kohout. Detecting
crosstalk errors in quantum information processors. Quantum,
4:321, 2020. URL https://quantum-journal.org/pap
ers/q-2020-09-11-321/ .
[25] Timothy Proctor, Stefan Seritan, Kenneth Rudinger, Erik
Nielsen, Robin Blume-Kohout, and Kevin Young. Scalable
randomized benchmarking of quantum computers using mirror
circuits. Physical Review Letters, 129(15), October 2022. ISSN
1079-7114. doi:10.1103/physrevlett.129.150502. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.129.150502.
[26] The Qiskit Team. Measuring quantum volume, Aug 2021. URL
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 23 =====

23
https://qiskit.org/textbook/ch-quantum-hardwar
e/measuring-quantum-volume.html.
[27] Robin Blume-Kohout and Kevin C. Young. A volumetric
framework for quantum computer benchmarks. Quantum, 4:
362, November 2020. ISSN 2521-327X. doi:10.22331 /q-2020-
11-15-362. URL https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2020-1
1-15-362.
[28] Charles H. Baldwin, Karl Mayer, Natalie C. Brown, Ciarán
Ryan-Anderson, and David Hayes. Re-examining the quantum
volume test: Ideal distributions, compiler optimizations, confi-
dence intervals, and scalable resource estimations. Quantum,
6:707, May 2022. ISSN 2521-327X. doi:10.22331 /q-2022-05-
09-707. URL https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2022-05-0
9-707.
[29] Elijah Pelofske, Andreas Bartschi, and Stephan Eidenbenz.
Quantum volume in practice: What users can expect from
NISQ devices. IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering,
3:1–19, 2022. doi:10.1109 /tqe.2022.3184764. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1109%2Ftqe.2022.3184764.
[30] Timothy Proctor, Stefan Seritan, Erik Nielsen, Kenneth
Rudinger, Kevin Young, Robin Blume-Kohout, and Mohan
Sarovar. Establishing trust in quantum computations, 2022.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.07568.
[31] Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum
Computing, 2015. URL https://github.com/SRI-Inter
national/QC-App-Oriented-Benchmarks .
[32] Scott Aaronson. Read the fine print. Nature Physics, 11(4):
291–293, Apr 2015. ISSN 1745-2481. doi:10.1038/nphys3272.
URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys3272.
[33] Xiaonan Liu, Haoshan Xie, Zhengyu Liu, and Chenyan Zhao.
Survey on the improvement and application of hhl algorithm.
Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 2333(1):012023, 2022.
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/2333/1/012023.
[34] Danial Dervovic, Mark Herbster, Peter Mountney, Simone
Severini, Naïri Usher, and Leonard Wossnig. Quantum linear
systems algorithms: a primer, 2018.
[35] Hector Jose Morrell Jr au2, Anika Zaman, and Hiu Yung Wong.
Step-by-step hhl algorithm walkthrough to enhance the under-
standing of critical quantum computing concepts, 2023.
[36] Yudong Cao, Anmer Daskin, Steven Frankel, and Sabre Kais.
Quantum circuit design for solving linear systems of equations.
Molecular Physics, 110(15-16):1675–1680, aug 2012. doi:
10.1080/00268976.2012.668289. URL https://doi.org/
10.1080%2F00268976.2012.668289.
[37] Yonghae Lee, Jaewoo Joo, and Soojoon Lee. Hybrid quan-
tum linear equation algorithm and its experimental test on
ibm quantum experience. Scientific Reports, 9, 03 2019. doi:
10.1038/s41598-019-41324-9.
[38] Ana Martin, Ruben Ibarrondo, and Mikel Sanz. Digital-
analog co-design of the harrow-hassidim-lloyd algo-
rithm. Physical Review Applied , 19(6), jun 2023.
doi:10.1103/physrevapplied.19.064056. URL h t t p s :
//doi.org/10.1103%2Fphysrevapplied.19.064056.
[39] Andrew M. Childs, Richard Cleve, Enrico Deotto, Edward
Farhi, Sam Gutmann, and Daniel A. Spielman. Exponen-
tial algorithmic speedup by a quantum walk. In Proceed-
ings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual ACM Symposium on The-
ory of Computing , STOC ’03, page 59–68, New York, NY ,
USA, 2003. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
1581136749. doi:10.1145 /780542.780552. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1145/780542.780552.
[40] Mikko Möttönen, Juha J. Vartiainen, Ville Bergholm, and
Martti M. Salomaa. Transformation of quantum states using
uniformly controlled rotations. 5(6):467–473, sep 2005. ISSN
1533-7146.
[41] Lidia Ruiz-Perez and Juan Carlos Garcia-Escartin. Quan-
tum arithmetic with the quantum fourier transform. Quan-
tum Information Processing , 16(6):152, Apr 2017. ISSN
1573-1332. doi:10.1007 /s11128-017-1603-1. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s11128-017-1603-1 .
[42] Romina Yalovetzky, Pierre Minssen, Dylan Herman, and Marco
Pistoia. Hybrid hhl with dynamic quantum circuits on real
hardware, 2023.
[43] Mario Motta, David M. Ceperley, Garnet Kin-Lic Chan, John A.
Gomez, Emanuel Gull, Sheng Guo, Carlos A. Jiménez-Hoyos,
Tran Nguyen Lan, Jia Li, Fengjie Ma, Andrew J. Millis, Niko-
lay V . Prokof’ev, Ushnish Ray, Gustavo E. Scuseria, Sandro
Sorella, Edwin M. Stoudenmire, Qiming Sun, Igor S. Tupitsyn,
Steven R. White, Dominika Zgid, and Shiwei Zhang. Towards
the solution of the many-electron problem in real materials:
Equation of state of the hydrogen chain with state-of-the-art
many-body methods. Phys. Rev. X, 7:031059, Sep 2017. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevX.7.031059. URL https://link.aps.org
/doi/10.1103/PhysRevX.7.031059.
[44] Changsu Cao, Jinzhao Sun, Xiao Yuan, Han-Shi Hu, Hung Q.
Pham, and Dingshun Lv. Ab initio quantum simulation of
strongly correlated materials with quantum embedding. npj
Computational Materials, 9(1), may 2023. doi:10.1038/s41524-
023-01045-0. URL https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs41524
-023-01045-0 .
[45] Joshua J. Goings, Alec White, Joonho Lee, Christofer S. Tauter-
mann, Matthias Degroote, Craig Gidney, Toru Shiozaki, Ryan
Babbush, and Nicholas C. Rubin. Reliably assessing the elec-
tronic structure of cytochrome p450 on today’s classical com-
puters and tomorrow’s quantum computers. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences , 119(38), sep 2022. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2203533119. URL https://doi.org/10.107
3%2Fpnas.2203533119.
[46] Alexander J. McCaskey, Zachary P. Parks, Jacek Jakowski,
Shirley V . Moore, T. Morris, Travis S. Humble, and Raphael C.
Pooser. Quantum chemistry as a benchmark for near-term
quantum computers, 2019. URL https://doi.org/10.103
8/s41534-019-0209-0 .
[47] Kübra Yeter-Aydeniz, Bryan T. Gard, Jacek Jakowski, Swar-
nadeep Majumder, George S. Barron, George Siopsis, Travis
Humble, and Raphael C. Pooser. Benchmarking quantum chem-
istry computations with variational, imaginary time evolution,
and krylov space solver algorithms, 2021.
[48] Pierre-Luc Dallaire-Demers, Michał St ˛ echły, Jerome F.
Gonthier, Ntwali Toussaint Bashige, Jonathan Romero, and
Yudong Cao. An application benchmark for fermionic quantum
simulations, 2020.
[49] Nicolas PD Sawaya, Daniel Marti-Dafcik, Yang Ho, Daniel P
Tabor, David Bernal, Alicia B Magann, Shavindra Premaratne,
Pradeep Dubey, Anne Matsuura, Nathan Bishop, Wibe A
de Jong, Simon Benjamin, Ojas D Parekh, Norm Tubman,
Katherine Klymko, and Daan Camps. Hamlib: A library of
hamiltonians for benchmarking quantum algorithms and hard-
ware, 2023.
[50] Nicholas H. Stair and Francesco A. Evangelista. Explor-
ing hilbert space on a budget: Novel benchmark set and
performance metric for testing electronic structure methods
in the regime of strong correlation, 2020. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1063/5.0014928.
[51] Jules Tilly, Hongxiang Chen, Shuxiang Cao, Dario Picozzi,
Kanav Setia, Ying Li, Edward Grant, Leonard Wossnig, Ivan
Rungger, George H Booth, et al. The variational quantum
eigensolver: a review of methods and best practices. Physics
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 24 =====

24
Reports, 986:1–128, 2022.
[52] Jarrod R McClean, Jonathan Romero, Ryan Babbush, and
Alán Aspuru-Guzik. The theory of variational hybrid quantum-
classical algorithms. New Journal of Physics, 18(2):023023,
feb 2016. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/18/2/023023. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/18/2/023023.
[53] Peter D. Johnson, Alexander A. Kunitsa, Jérôme F. Gonthier,
Maxwell D. Radin, Corneliu Buda, Eric J. Doskocil, Clena M.
Abuan, and Jhonathan Romero. Reducing the cost of energy
estimation in the variational quantum eigensolver algorithm
with robust amplitude estimation, 2022. URL https://arxi
v.org/abs/2203.07275.
[54] Steven R White. Density matrix formulation for quantum
renormalization groups. Physical review letters, 69(19):2863,
1992.
[55] Frank Arute, Kunal Arya, Ryan Babbush, Dave Bacon,
Joseph C. Bardin, Rami Barends, Sergio Boixo, Michael
Broughton, Bob B. Buckley, David A. Buell, Brian Burkett,
Nicholas Bushnell, Yu Chen, Zijun Chen, Benjamin Chiaro,
Roberto Collins, William Courtney, Sean Demura, Andrew
Dunsworth, Edward Farhi, Austin Fowler, Brooks Foxen,
Craig Gidney, Marissa Giustina, Rob Gra ff, Steve Habeg-
ger, Matthew P. Harrigan, Alan Ho, Sabrina Hong, Trent
Huang, William J. Huggins, Lev Ioffe, Sergei V . Isakov, Evan
Jeffrey, Zhang Jiang, Cody Jones, Dvir Kafri, Kostyantyn
Kechedzhi, Julian Kelly, Seon Kim, Paul V . Klimov, Alexan-
der Korotkov, Fedor Kostritsa, David Landhuis, Pavel Laptev,
Mike Lindmark, Erik Lucero, Orion Martin, John M. Marti-
nis, Jarrod R. McClean, Matt McEwen, Anthony Megrant,
Xiao Mi, Masoud Mohseni, Wojciech Mruczkiewicz, Josh
Mutus, Ofer Naaman, Matthew Neeley, Charles Neill, Hart-
mut Neven, Murphy Yuezhen Niu, Thomas E. O’Brien, Eric
Ostby, Andre Petukhov, Harald Putterman, Chris Quintana,
Pedram Roushan, Nicholas C. Rubin, Daniel Sank, Kevin J.
Satzinger, Vadim Smelyanskiy, Doug Strain, Kevin J. Sung,
Marco Szalay, Tyler Y . Takeshita, Amit Vainsencher, Theodore
White, Nathan Wiebe, Z. Jamie Yao, Ping Yeh, and Adam
Zalcman. Hartree-fock on a superconducting qubit quantum
computer. Science, 369(6507):1084–1089, aug 2020. doi:
10.1126/science.abb9811. URL https://doi.org/10.112
6%2Fscience.abb9811.
[56] Mario Motta, David M. Ceperley, Garnet Kin-Lic Chan, John A.
Gomez, Emanuel Gull, Sheng Guo, Carlos A. Jimé nez-Hoyos,
Tran Nguyen Lan, Jia Li, Fengjie Ma, Andrew J. Millis, Niko-
lay V . Prokof’ev, Ushnish Ray, Gustavo E. Scuseria, Sandro
Sorella, Edwin M. Stoudenmire, Qiming Sun, Igor S. Tupit-
syn, Steven R. White, Dominika Zgid, and Shiwei Zhang
and. Towards the solution of the many-electron problem
in real materials: Equation of state of the hydrogen chain
with state-of-the-art many-body methods. Physical Review
X, 7(3), sep 2017. doi:10.1103 /physrevx.7.031059. URL
https://doi.org/10.1103%2Fphysrevx.7.031059.
[57] Yudong Cao, Jonathan Romero, Jonathan P. Olson, Matthias
Degroote, Peter D. Johnson, Mária Kieferová, Ian D. Kivlichan,
Tim Menke, Borja Peropadre, Nicolas P. D. Sawaya, and
et al. Quantum chemistry in the age of quantum comput-
ing. Chemical Reviews, 119(19):10856–10915, Aug 2019.
ISSN 1520-6890. doi:10.1021 /acs.chemrev.8b00803. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803.
[58] Vincent E Elfving, Marta Millaruelo, José A Gámez, and Chris-
tian Gogolin. Simulating quantum chemistry in the seniority-
zero space on qubit-based quantum computers.Physical Review
A, 103(3):032605, 2021.
[59] Luning Zhao, Joshua Goings, Kyujin Shin, Woomin Kyoung,
Johanna I Fuks, June-Koo Kevin Rhee, Young Min Rhee, Ken-
neth Wright, Jason Nguyen, Jungsang Kim, et al. Orbital-
optimized pair-correlated electron simulations on trapped-ion
quantum computers. npj Quantum Information, 9(1):60, 2023.
[60] T E O’Brien, G Anselmetti, F Gkritsis, V E Elfving, S Polla,
W J Huggins, O Oumarou, K Kechedzhi, D Abanin, R Acharya,
I Aleiner, R Allen, T I Andersen, K Anderson, M Ansmann,
F Arute, K Arya, A Asfaw, J Atalaya, J C Bardin, A Bengts-
son, G Bortoli, A Bourassa, J Bovaird, L Brill, M Broughton,
B Buckley, D A Buell, T Burger, B Burkett, N Bushnell,
J Campero, Z Chen, B Chiaro, D Chik, J Cogan, R Collins,
P Conner, W Courtney, A L Crook, B Curtin, D M Debroy,
S Demura, I Drozdov, A Dunsworth, C Erickson, L Faoro,
E Farhi, R Fatemi, V S Ferreira, L Flores Burgos, E Forati, A G
Fowler, B Foxen, W Giang, C Gidney, D Gilboa, M Giustina,
R Gosula, A Grajales Dau, J A Gross, S Habegger, M C
Hamilton, M Hansen, M P Harrigan, S D Harrington, P Heu,
M R Ho ffmann, S Hong, T Huang, A Hu ff, L B Io ffe, S V
Isakov, J Iveland, E Jeffrey, Z Jiang, C Jones, P Juhas, D Kafri,
T Khattar, M Khezri, M Kieferová, S Kim, P V Klimov, A R
Klots, A N Korotkov, F Kostritsa, J M Kreikebaum, D Land-
huis, P Laptev, K-M Lau, L Laws, J Lee, K Lee, B J Lester,
A T Lill, W Liu, W P Livingston, A Locharla, F D Malone,
S Mandrà, O Martin, S Martin, J R McClean, T McCourt,
M McEwen, X Mi, A Mieszala, K C Miao, M Mohseni, S Mon-
tazeri, A Morvan, R Movassagh, W Mruczkiewicz, O Naa-
man, M Neeley, C Neill, A Nersisyan, M Newman, J H Ng,
A Nguyen, M Nguyen, M Y Niu, S Omonije, A Opremcak,
A Petukhov, R Potter, L P Pryadko, C Quintana, C Rocque,
P Roushan, N Saei, D Sank, K Sankaragomathi, K J Satzinger,
H F Schurkus, C Schuster, M J Shearn, A Shorter, N Shutty,
V Shvarts, J Skruzny, W C Smith, R D Somma, G Sterling,
D Strain, M Szalay, D Thor, A Torres, G Vidal, B Villalonga,
C V ollgraff Heidweiller, T White, B W K Woo, C Xing, Z J Yao,
P Yeh, J Yoo, G Young, A Zalcman, Y Zhang, N Zhu, N Zo-
brist, D Bacon, S Boixo, Y Chen, J Hilton, J Kelly, E Lucero,
A Megrant, H Neven, V Smelyanskiy, C Gogolin, R Babbush,
and N C Rubin. Purification-based quantum error mitigation
of pair-correlated electron simulations. Nat. Phys., pages 1–6,
October 2023.
[61] Yunseong Nam, Jwo-Sy Chen, Neal C Pisenti, Kenneth Wright,
Conor Delaney, Dmitri Maslov, Kenneth R Brown, Stewart
Allen, Jason M Amini, Joel Apisdorf, et al. Ground-state energy
estimation of the water molecule on a trapped-ion quantum
computer. npj Quantum Information, 6(1):33, 2020.
[62] Joonho Lee, William J Huggins, Martin Head-Gordon, and
K Birgitta Whaley. Generalized unitary coupled cluster wave
functions for quantum computation. Journal of chemical theory
and computation, 15(1):311–324, 2018.
[63] Joshua Goings, Luning Zhao, Jacek Jakowski, Titus Morris,
and Raphael Pooser. Molecular symmetry in vqe: A dual ap-
proach for trapped-ion simulations of benzene. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.00667, 2023.
[64] Qiskit Runtime Sampler Primitive. https://qiskit.org/e
cosystem/ibm-runtime/stubs/qiskit_ibm_runtime.
Sampler.html, 2022. IBM Quantum Lab.
[65] Seyon Sivarajah, Silas Dilkes, Alexander Cowtan, Will Sim-
mons, Alec Edgington, and Ross Duncan. tket: a retargetable
compiler for NISQ devices. Quantum Science and Technology,
6(1):014003, nov 2020. doi:10.1088/2058-9565/ab8e92. URL
https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-9565/ab8e92.
[66] Q-CTRL web site. https://q-ctrl.com/, 2023. Q-CTRL
File Opal.
[67] Zhenyu Cai, Ryan Babbush, Simon C. Benjamin, Suguru Endo,
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 25 =====

25
William J. Huggins, Ying Li, Jarrod R. McClean, and Thomas E.
O’Brien. Quantum error mitigation, 2023.
[68] Dayue Qin, Yanzhu Chen, and Ying Li. Error statistics and
scalability of quantum error mitigation formulas. npj Quantum
Information, 9(1), apr 2023. doi:10.1038/s41534-023-00707-7.
URL https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs41534-023-00707
-7.
[69] Ryuji Takagi, Suguru Endo, Shintaro Minagawa, and Mile Gu.
Fundamental limits of quantum error mitigation. npj Quantum
Information, 8(1), sep 2022. doi:10.1038/s41534-022-00618-z.
URL https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs41534-022-00618
-z.
[70] Cristina Cirstoiu, Silas Dilkes, Daniel Mills, Seyon Sivara-
jah, and Ross Duncan. V olumetric Benchmarking of Er-
ror Mitigation with Qermit. Quantum, 7:1059, July 2023.
ISSN 2521-327X. doi:10.22331 /q-2023-07-13-1059. URL
https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2023-07-13-1059 .
[71] Paul D. Nation, Hwajung Kang, Neereja Sundaresan, and
Jay M. Gambetta. Scalable mitigation of measurement er-
rors on quantum computers. PRX Quantum, 2(4), nov 2021.
doi:10.1103/prxquantum.2.040326. URL https://doi.org/
10.1103%2Fprxquantum.2.040326.
[72] Mthree Error Mitigation. https://qiskit.org/ecosyst
em/mthree/, 2022. IBM Quantum Lab.
[73] Paul D. Nation and Matthew Treinish. Suppressing quantum
circuit errors due to system variability. PRX Quantum, 4(1),
mar 2023. doi:10.1103 /prxquantum.4.010327. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1103%2Fprxquantum.4.010327.
[74] Daniel Mills, Seyon Sivarajah, Travis L. Scholten, and Ross
Duncan. Application-motivated, holistic benchmarking of a full
quantum computing stack. Quantum, 5:415, Mar 2021. ISSN
2521-327X. doi:10.22331 /q-2021-03-22-415. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.22331/q-2021-03-22-415 .
[75] Mirko Amico, Helena Zhang, Petar Jurcevic, Lev S. Bishop,
Paul Nation, Andrew Wack, and David C. McKay. Defining
standard strategies for quantum benchmarks, 2023. URL http
s://arxiv.org/abs/2303.02108.
[76] Robert R. Tucci. An introduction to cartan’s kak decomposition
for qc programmers, 2005. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
quant-ph/0507171.
[77] Pranav S. Mundada, Aaron Barbosa, Smarak Maity, Yu-
lun Wang, Thomas Merkh, T.M. Stace, Felicity Nielson,
Andre R.R. Carvalho, Michael Hush, Michael J. Biercuk,
and Yuval Baum. Experimental benchmarking of an auto-
mated deterministic error-suppression workflow for quantum
algorithms. Phys. Rev. Appl. , 20:024034, Aug 2023. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevApplied.20.024034. URL https://link.a
ps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.20.024034.
[78] Yuval Baum, Mirko Amico, Sean Howell, Michael Hush, Mag-
gie Liuzzi, Pranav Mundada, Thomas Merkh, Andre R.R. Car-
valho, and Michael J. Biercuk. Experimental deep reinforce-
ment learning for error-robust gate-set design on a supercon-
ducting quantum computer. PRX Quantum, 2:040324, Nov
2021. doi:10.1103 /PRXQuantum.2.040324. URL https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PRXQuantum.2.040324.
[79] Andre R. R. Carvalho, Harrison Ball, Michael J. Biercuk,
Michael R. Hush, and Felix Thomsen. Error-robust quan-
tum logic optimization using a cloud quantum computer in-
terface. Phys. Rev. Applied , 15:064054, Jun 2021. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevApplied.15.064054. URL https://link.a
ps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.15.064054.
[80] Nam H. Nguyen, E. C. Behrman, Mohamed A. Moustafa,
and J. E. Steck. Benchmarking neural networks for quan-
tum computations. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
and Learning Systems , page 1–10, 2019. ISSN 2162-2388.
doi:10.1109/tnnls.2019.2933394. URL http://dx.doi.org
/10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2933394.
[81] Maxwell T. West, Sarah M. Erfani, Christopher Leckie, Mar-
tin Sevior, Lloyd C. L. Hollenberg, and Muhammad Usman.
Benchmarking adversarially robust quantum machine learn-
ing at scale. Physical Review Research , 5(2), June 2023.
ISSN 2643-1564. doi:10.1103/physrevresearch.5.023186. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.5.023
186.
[82] Marcello Benedetti, Delfina Garcia-Pintos, Oscar Perdomo, Vi-
cente Leyton-Ortega, Yunseong Nam, and Alejandro Perdomo-
Ortiz. A generative modeling approach for benchmarking and
training shallow quantum circuits. npj Quantum Information,
5(1), May 2019. ISSN 2056-6387. doi:10.1038 /s41534-019-
0157-8. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41534-019
-0157-8.
[83] Evan Peters and Maria Schuld. Generalization despite overfit-
ting in quantum machine learning models. Quantum, 7:1210,
December 2023. ISSN 2521-327X. doi:10.22331 /q-2023-12-
20-1210. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.22331/q-2023-1
2-20-1210.
[84] Matthias C. Caro, Hsin-Yuan Huang, Nicholas Ezzell, Joe
Gibbs, Andrew T. Sornborger, Lukasz Cincio, Patrick J. Coles,
and Zoë Holmes. Out-of-distribution generalization for learn-
ing quantum dynamics. Nature Communications, 14(1), July
2023. ISSN 2041-1723. doi:10.1038 /s41467-023-39381-w.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39381
-w.
[85] Matthias C Caro, Hsin-Yuan Huang, M Cerezo, Kunal Sharma,
Andrew Sornborger, Lukasz Cincio, and Patrick J Coles. Gen-
eralization in quantum machine learning from few training data.
Nature Communications, 13(1):4919, aug 2022.
[86] Xun Gao, Eric R. Anschuetz, Sheng-Tao Wang, J. Ignacio
Cirac, and Mikhail D. Lukin. Enhancing generative models
via quantum correlations. Phys. Rev. X, 12:021037, May 2022.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.12.021037.
[87] Joseph Bowles, Victoria J Wright, Máté Farkas, Nathan Kil-
loran, and Maria Schuld. Contextuality and inductive bias in
quantum machine learning, 2023.
[88] Elton Yechao Zhu, Sonika Johri, Dave Bacon, Mert Esencan,
Jungsang Kim, Mark Muir, Nikhil Murgai, Jason Nguyen, Neal
Pisenti, Adam Schouela, Ksenia Sosnova, and Ken Wright.
Generative quantum learning of joint probability distribu-
tion functions. Phys. Rev. Res., 4:043092, Nov 2022. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevResearch.4.043092.
[89] Manuel S. Rudolph, Ntwali Bashige Toussaint, Amara
Katabarwa, Sonika Johri, Borja Peropadre, and Alejandro
Perdomo-Ortiz. Generation of high-resolution handwritten
digits with an ion-trap quantum computer. 2020.
[90] He-Liang Huang, Yuxuan Du, Ming Gong, Youwei Zhao,
Yulin Wu, Chaoyue Wang, Shaowei Li, Futian Liang, Jin
Lin, Yu Xu, Rui Yang, Tongliang Liu, Min-Hsiu Hsieh, Hui
Deng, Hao Rong, Cheng-Zhi Peng, Chao-Yang Lu, Yu-Ao
Chen, Dacheng Tao, Xiaobo Zhu, and Jian-Wei Pan. Exper-
imental quantum generative adversarial networks for image
generation. Phys. Rev. Appl. , 16:024051, Aug 2021. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevApplied.16.024051. URL https://link.a
ps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.16.024051.
[91] Daniel Silver, Tirthak Patel, William Cutler, Aditya Ranjan,
Harshitta Gandhi, and Devesh Tiwari. Mosaiq: Quantum gen-
erative adversarial networks for image generation on nisq com-
puters, 2023.
[92] Daiwei Zhu, Weiwei Shen, Annarita Giani, Saikat Ray Ma-
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024

===== PAGE 26 =====

26
jumder, Bogdan Neculaes, and Sonika Johri. Copula-based risk
aggregation with trapped ion quantum computers. 2022. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.11937.
[93] Sonika Johri, Shantanu Debnath, Avinash Mocherla, Alexan-
dros SINGK, Anupam Prakash, Jungsang Kim, and Iordanis
Kerenidis. Nearest centroid classification on a trapped ion
quantum computer. npj Quantum Information, 7(1):122, Aug
2021. ISSN 2056-6387. doi:10.1038 /s41534-021-00456-5.
[94] El Amine Cherrat, Iordanis Kerenidis, Natansh Mathur, Jonas
Landman, Martin Strahm, and Yun Yvonna Li. Quantum vision
transformers. 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209
.08167.
[95] Daniel Silver, Tirthak Patel, and Devesh Tiwari. Quilt: Effec-
tive multi-class classification on quantum computers using an
ensemble of diverse quantum classifiers. Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 36(8):8324–8332,
Jun. 2022. doi:10.1609/aaai.v36i8.20807. URL https://oj
s.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/20807.
[96] Arthur Pesah, M. Cerezo, Samson Wang, Tyler V olkoff, An-
drew T. Sornborger, and Patrick J. Coles. Absence of barren
plateaus in quantum convolutional neural networks. Phys. Rev.
X, 11:041011, Oct 2021. doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.11.041011.
[97] Iordanis Kerenidis, Jonas Landman, and Natansh Mathur. Clas-
sical and quantum algorithms for orthogonal neural networks.
2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.07198.
[98] Maria Schuld, Ryan Sweke, and Johannes Jakob Meyer. Ef-
fect of data encoding on the expressive power of variational
quantum-machine-learning models. Phys. Rev. A, 103:032430,
Mar 2021. doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.103.032430. URL https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.103.032430.
[99] Iris Cong and Mikhail D. Choi, Soonwonand Lukin. Quantum
convolutional neural networks. Nature Physics, 15(12):1273–
1278, Dec 2019. ISSN 1745-2481. doi:10.1038 /s41567-019-
0648-8. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.03787.
[100] Tak Hur, Leeseok Kim, and Daniel K. Park. Quantum convolu-
tional neural network for classical data classification. Quantum
Machine Intelligence, 4(1), February 2022. ISSN 2524-4914.
doi:10.1007/s42484-021-00061-x. URL http://dx.doi.o
rg/10.1007/s42484-021-00061-x .
[101] Mnist database 784. https://www.openml.org/search?
type=data&sort=runs&id=554&status=active , 2023.
Handwritten Digit Database.
[102] Sci-kit sklearn. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/ ,
2023. Machine Learning Package in Python.
Quantum Algorithm Exploration using Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks February 15, 2024
