===== PAGE 1 =====

Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing
Thomas Lubinski,1, 2 Sonika Johri,3 Paul Varosy,4 Jeremiah Coleman,5 Luning
Zhao,3 Jason Necaise,6 Charles H. Baldwin, 7 Karl Mayer,7 and Timothy Proctor 8
(Quantum Economic Development Consortium (QED-C) collaboration) ∗
1Quantum Circuits Inc, 25 Science Park, New Haven, CT 06511
2QED-C Technical Advisory Committee on Standards and Performance Benchmarks Chairman
3IonQ Inc, 4505 Campus Dr, College Park, MD 20740, USA
4Department of Physics, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, CO 80401, USA
5Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, 08544, USA
6D-Wave Systems, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada, V5G 4M9, Canada
7Quantinuum, 303 S. Technology Ct, Broomﬁeld, CO 80021, USA
8Quantum Performance Laboratory, Sandia National Laboratories, Livermore, CA 94550, USA
(Dated: January 11, 2023)
In this work we introduce an open source suite of quantum application-oriented performance benchmarks that
is designed to measure the eﬀectiveness of quantum computing hardware at executing quantum applications.
These benchmarks probe a quantum computer’s performance on various algorithms and small applications as
the problem size is varied, by mapping out the ﬁdelity of the results as a function of circuit width and depth
using the framework of volumetric benchmarking. In addition to estimating the ﬁdelity of results generated
by quantum execution, the suite is designed to benchmark certain aspects of the execution pipeline in order to
provide end-users with a practical measure of both the quality of and the time to solution. Our methodology
is constructed to anticipate advances in quantum computing hardware that are likely to emerge in the next ﬁve
years. This benchmarking suite is designed to be readily accessible to a broad audience of users and provides
benchmarks that correspond to many well-known quantum computing algorithms.
CONTENTS
I. Introduction 2
II. Background 3
A. Component-Level Speciﬁcations 3
B. Quantum V olume 4
C. V olumetric Benchmarks 4
III. Application-Oriented Benchmarks 5
A. The Algorithms in the Benchmarking Suite 5
B. Constructing Benchmarking Circuits 6
C. The Benchmarking Procedure 7
D. V olumetric Positioning 7
E. V olumetric Backgrounds 7
F. Circuit Depth 8
G. Quantifying Result Quality with Circuit Fidelity 9
H. Implementation Rules 10
IV . Benchmark Results and Analysis 11
A. Benchmark Results on a Quantum Simulator 11
B. Benchmark Results on Quantum Hardware 12
C. Comparison to Generic Benchmarks 16
D. Impact of Compiler Optimization Techniques 17
∗ This work was sponsored by the Quantum Economic Development Con-
sortium (QED-C) and was performed under the auspices of the QED-C
Technical Advisory Committee on Standards and Performance Benchmarks.
The authors acknowledge many committee members for their input to and
feedback on the project and this manuscript.
V . Measuring Execution Time 18
A. Total Execution Time 18
B. Quantum Execution Time 19
VI. Summary and Conclusions 20
Data and Code Availability 21
Acknowledgement 21
A. Selected Algorithms and Applications 22
1. Shallow Oracle-Based Algorithms 22
2. Quantum Fourier Transform 22
3. Grover’s Search Algorithm 24
4. Phase and Amplitude Estimation 24
5. Hamiltonian Simulation 25
6. Monte Carlo Sampling 25
7. Variational Quantum Eigensolver 26
8. Shor’s Order Finding 27
B. Limitations of the Average Result Fidelity 28
C. Issues with Di ﬀerent Quantum Computing APIs 28
D. Advances in Quantum Computers 29
1. Mid-Circuit Measurements 29
2. Circuit Parameterization 30
3. Multiply-Controlled Gates 30
4. Close Classical /Quantum Integration 30
References 32
arXiv:2110.03137v3  [quant-ph]  10 Jan 2023

===== PAGE 2 =====

2
I. INTRODUCTION
Over the past decade, quantum computers have evolved
from exploratory physics experiments into cloud-accessible
hardware, heralding their transformation into early-stage com-
mercial products. A broad audience of users has now begun
to explore and interact with quantum computers, inspiring re-
search into practical quantum algorithms [ 1] and garnering
attention from the academic, government, and business com-
munities. With recent demonstrations of quantum advantage
[2, 3], it seems increasingly likely that quantum computers
will someday outperform their classical counterparts for practi-
cally relevant tasks. Unlike contemporary classical computers,
though, the information processing capabilities of current quan-
tum computers are limited primarily by errors, not by their size
or speed.
Quantum computers can experience a wide range of complex
errors. Many of these errors result from noise in or miscalibra-
tions of the lowest-level components in the system—quantum
gate operations and the qubits they act on. Component-level
benchmarks and characterization protocols, such as random-
ized benchmarking [ 4, 5] or gate set tomography [ 6], can
provide insight into the type and magnitude of these errors.
These tools are critical for experimental e ﬀorts to improve
hardware. But many users seeking to run an application on a
quantum computer are not concerned with low-level details,
but rather how likely their application is to execute success-
fully. Extrapolating low-level performance metrics to predict
the performance of a speciﬁc application is challenging, and
these extrapolations are often inaccurate [7, 8].
The limited predictive power of low-level performance met-
rics has contributed to an increasing focus on benchmarks that
concisely and directly summarize the holistic performance of a
quantum computer [8–10]. A notable example is the quantum
volume benchmark [10], which is designed to probe the eﬀec-
tive useful size of a speciﬁc quantum computer and summarize
it in one number: the quantum volume. The quantum volume
has been widely adopted and reported by the community. How-
ever, due to the complexity of errors in quantum hardware,
neither a device’s quantum volume nor any other single metric
is likely to accurately predict its performance on all applica-
tions [7, 8]. There is thus a pressing need for a diverse set of
application-centric metrics and benchmarks that test the per-
formance of quantum computers on practically relevant tasks.
Such benchmarks will enable hardware developers to quantify
their progress in commercially relevant ways, and will make
it possible for end users to more accurately predict how the
available hardware will perform on their application.
In this paper, we introduce an extensible suite of quantum
performance benchmarks that are application-oriented. These
benchmarks are designed to test quantum computers on a di-
verse range of tasks that are based on quantum computing
applications and algorithms. Our suite complements other
recent benchmarking methods [ 11–17] that use, e.g., small
chemistry problems or basic quantum circuits as benchmarks.
Demonstrated in Figure 1, each benchmark in our suite is de-
rived from an algorithm or application and speciﬁes a scalable
family of quantum circuits. The benchmark suite is intended
to evaluate the capability of quantum hardware to successfully
execute meaningful computational tasks, and to reﬂect likely
use cases for quantum computers. The benchmarking suite is
available as a public, open-source repository with extensive
documentation [18]. Validated implementations of our bench-
marks are supplied in multiple common quantum programming
languages, including Qiskit [19], Cirq [20], Braket [21] and
Q# [22], and can be rapidly deployed on nearly all major cloud
quantum computers.
Our benchmarking suite consists of a set of benchmarks that
are each based on an algorithm or application, and each bench-
mark is designed to measure proxies for the quality of and the
time to solution for its corresponding application. In analyz-
ing the results of these benchmarks, we primarily adopt the
framework of volumetric benchmarking [23], as shown in Fig-
ure 1. This approach, which generalizes the quantum volume,
displays the result quality for each application as a function of
the circuit width (often this is equal to the problem size) and
the computation’s length (circuit depth). To enable algorithmic
volumetric benchmarks, we deﬁne a normalized measure of
result quality that makes results from di ﬀerent applications
comparable, and we deﬁne a normalized, device-independent
measure of circuit depth that removes many of the complica-
tions associated with diverse native gate sets and dissimilar
device connectivities. This analysis makes it possible to easily
compare the performance of di ﬀerence quantum computing
devices on the same tasks.
Our benchmarking suite is intended to be an evolving code
base, accepting contributions from the quantum computing
research community. Throughout this paper we highlight the
limitations of the ﬁrst version of our benchmarking suite, re-
ported here, and suggest paths towards enhancing the suite.
Indeed, there is evidence from classical computing that a suite
of successful benchmarks will evolve signiﬁcantly over time
as weaknesses are uncovered and as hardware evolves. A com-
pelling example is the evolution of the SPEC (Standard Per-
formance Evaluation Corporation) benchmark suite [24, 25],
one of the most successful suites for benchmarking classical
computers. Starting in the late 1980s with 10 benchmarks, this
suite went through at least 5 major revisions over the next two
decades, stabilizing in 2006 with 25 benchmarks, only 6 of
which have some resemblance to those of the early suite.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section
II provides background on the fundamentals guiding this work.
Section III introduces our application-oriented benchmarks
and our methodology. In Section IV we present results from
executing subsets of the benchmark suite on quantum simu-
lators and quantum hardware. We discuss the challenges of
measuring execution time in Section V, and we conclude in
Section VI. Appendix A contains a detailed description of each
of our application-oriented benchmarks. The limitations of
our current benchmarking suite are highlighted throughout the
paper, and Appendices C and B address some of them in detail.
In Appendix D we analyze the adaptations to our suite that will
be required to address recent technological enhancements such
as mid-circuit measurements, parameterized gate operations,
and hybrid classical-quantum computations.
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 3 =====

3
1 2 3 4 7 10 17 27 43 69110176281450721 1K 2K 3K 5K 8K12K
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
QV=32
Bernstein-Vazirani (1)
Deutsch-Jozsa
Hidden Shift
Bernstein-Vazirani (2)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator 2022-10-15 20:22:17 UTC
1 2 3 5 9 15 26 44 77132227390670 1K 2K 3K 6K10K17K30K51K
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
QV=32
Quantum Fourier Transform (2)
Phase Estimation
Quantum Fourier Transform (1)
Amplitude Estimation
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator 2022-10-15 21:16:20 UTC
1 2 5 11 23 52113249549 1K 3K 6K13K28K62K137K301K662K1M 3M 7M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
QV=32
Hamiltonian Simulation
VQE Simulation (1)
Monte Carlo Sampling (2)
Shor's Order Finding (2)
Grover's Search
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator 2022-10-15 20:22:22 UTC
FIG. 1. Quantum Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks. The results of executing our quantum application-oriented performance
benchmarking suite on a simulator of a noisy quantum computer, with results split into benchmarks based on three loose categories of algorithm:
tutorial, subroutine, and functional. For each benchmark, circuits are run for a variety of problem sizes. This typically correspond to the circuit’s
width, i.e., the number of qubits it acts on, which here range from 2 to 12 qubits. The result ﬁdelity, a measure of the result quality, is computed
for each circuit execution, and is shown as a colored square positioned at the corresponding circuit’s width and normalized depth. Results
for circuits of equal width and similar depth are averaged together. The results of the application-oriented benchmarks are shown on top of a
‘volumetric background’ (grey-scale squares). Here and throughout this paper, except where stated, this volumetric background is a heuristic
extrapolation of a device’s quantum volume (here, 32) to predict the region in which a circuit’s result ﬁdelity will be above1/2 (the grey squares).
Note that this extrapolation is not expected to always be accurate (see discussion in main text) but it is nevertheless useful. This is because
any deviations between the performance of the algorithmic benchmarks and the prediction of the volumetric background signify that, for the
processor in question, the performance of these algorithms is diﬃcult to predict from the processor’s quantum volume alone.
II. BACKGROUND
In this section we review the methods on which our work is
based. To place our work in context, in Section II A we begin
with a brief discussion of the component-level performance
metrics that are typically available to users of the current gen-
eration of hardware. Throughout this paper we will compare
a quantum computer’s performance on our benchmarks with
its quantum volume, so in Section II B we review the quantum
volume metric. To present results from our benchmarks we
will primarily use the framework of volumetric benchmarking.
In Section II C we review this methodology and explain how it
provides the underpinning for the analysis of our application
benchmarks.
A. Component-Level Speciﬁcations
There are many techniques for estimating component-level
performance of quantum computing devices, e.g., randomized
benchmarking [4, 5] and gate set tomography [6]. Hardware
providers use these techniques to calibrate and test their sys-
tems, and they often publish performance metrics extracted
from the results of these experiments. The measures of perfor-
mance that providers report to users of their systems typically
include one- and two-qubit gate ﬁdelity, state preparation and
measurement (SPAM) ﬁdelity, and measures of how long each
qubit can retain quantum information (T1 and T2 coherence
times). For example, Figure 2 shows the contents of the text
ﬁle that the Amazon Braket cloud service [26] presents to users
FIG. 2. An example of component-level performance metrics.The
component-level performance metrics provided by Amazon Braket
for the IonQ Quantum Processing Unit.
of the IonQ Quantum Processing Unit (QPU), and Figure 3
shows similar information that Google [27] provide for its We-
ber device (Sycamore class). Other quantum computing cloud
services, such as IBM Quantum Services [28], provide similar
types of information about their machines.
Component-level performance metrics provide a lot of infor-
mation about a machine, but they have at least two important
limitations. Firstly, component-level performance metrics are
typically not suﬃcient to accurately predict a device’s perfor-
mance on an algorithm [7, 8]. This is because summary metrics
cannot capture the full complexity of errors in quantum com-
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 4 =====

4
FIG. 3. An example of component-level performance metrics.The
component-level performance metrics provided by Google for its
Weber device.
puting components (e.g., individual gates and readouts), and
not all sources of error are even apparent when testing a single
component (e.g., crosstalk [29, 30]). Second, component-level
metrics are challenging for non-specialists to interpret. It is
often diﬃcult for a prospective quantum computer user to ex-
trapolate from component-level metrics to predict how their
application will perform.
B. Quantum Volume
In this work we compare results from our benchmarks to
predictions extrapolated from a device’s quantum volume, and
so we now review the quantum volume. IBM introduced the
quantum volume (QV) metric [10] in recognition of the need
for a simple way to quantify and compare the capabilities of
quantum computing devices. The quantum volume is a single
metric that is inﬂuenced by multiple factors contributing to
the overall performance of a quantum computer, including its
number of qubits, systemic errors, device connectivity, and
compiler eﬃciency. Several vendors and users have welcomed
this as a step towards quantifying what a quantum computer
can do [ 31]. IBM publishes the quantum volume for each
machine that it makes available to external users through IBM
Quantum Services [ 28], as shown in Figure 4. Note that a
device with more qubits does not always have a larger quantum
volume.
A quantum computer’s quantum volume is deﬁned in terms
of its average performance on a particular set of random cir-
cuits, which we refer to as the quantum volume circuits. An
n-qubit quantum volume circuit is a square circuit consisting
of n layers of Haar-random SU(4) unitaries between⌊n/2⌋ ran-
domly selected qubit pairs (where⌊n/2⌋ rounds n/2 down to the
nearest integer). A device’s quantum volume is deﬁned to be
2n with n being both the width (the number of qubits) and
the depth (the number of layers) of the largest quantum vol-
ume circuits that can be executed ‘successfully’ on a speciﬁed
quantum device. So a quantum computer that can successfully
execute 5 layer quantum volume circuits on 5 qubits, but not 6
FIG. 4. Quantum volume examples. The number of qubits and the
quantum volume for a selection of IBM Q machines, accessed via
IBM Quantum Services.
layer quantum volume circuits on 6 qubits, would have a quan-
tum volume of 25 or 32. A device is considered to implement
n-qubit quantum volume circuits successfully if, on average,
it produces more ‘heavy outputs’ than a set threshold of 2/3
with two-sigma conﬁdence. Quantum volume is deﬁned as the
exponential of the circuit depth as this is intended to represent
the challenge of simulating the same circuit on a classical com-
puter. Note, however, that no single number can summarize
the many dimensions that make up a quantum computer’s per-
formance characteristics [7, 32]. For example, the quantum
volume is not guaranteed to reliably predict the performance
of wide and shallow circuits, or deep and narrow circuits.
C. Volumetric Benchmarks
To present results from our benchmarks we will primarily
use the framework of volumetric benchmarking [ 23], which
we now review. V olumetric benchmarking is a framework
for constructing and visualizing the results of large, ﬂexible
families of benchmarks. It consists of (1) choosing a family of
circuits to use as a benchmark, (2) selecting circuits from this
family and executing them on the hardware to be benchmarked,
and then (3) plotting the observed performance of the hardware
on these circuits as a function of the circuits’ width and depth.
The results are plotted in the depth× width ‘volumetric space’,
as illustrated in Figure 5. The data points (here, grey-scale
squares) show the result quality for the tested circuits of that
shape (width and depth), and in this example the metric of
result quality takes one of two values: ‘success’ (grey squares)
or ‘fail’ (white squares). Note that Figure 5 also contains the
location of the quantum volume circuits (black squares) and
a quantum volume region (grey rectangle) that we explain in
Section III D.
V olumetric benchmarking can be used to estimate and report
the performance of both wide shallow circuits and narrow deep
circuits, in addition to square circuits like those tested in the
quantum volume benchmark. Furthermore, volumetric bench-
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 5 =====

5
FIG. 5. An example of volumetric benchmarking. V olumetric
benchmarking results for a hypothetical 12-qubit quantum computer,
whereby a quantum computer’s performance on some family of cir-
cuits is mapped out as a function of circuit width and depth. This ex-
ample uses a binary measure of performance: grey and white squares
show the circuit shapes at which the test circuits succeeded and failed,
respectively, according to this metric. The location of the quantum
volume circuits, that would be used to extract the quantum volume,
are shown in bold. Here and throughout, ‘depth’ for all circuits is
deﬁned with respect to a particular standardized gate set, and in this
gate set the quantum volume circuits are not square.
marking is not restricted to a single kind of circuit (e.g., the spe-
ciﬁc random circuits of the quantum volume benchmark). This
makes volumetric benchmarking an ideal framework within
which to place application-oriented benchmarks.
III. APPLICATION-ORIENTED BENCHMARKS
In this section we introduce our application-oriented bench-
marking suite, and we explain how we analyze the data and
present the results. A quantum algorithm or application (e.g.,
Grover’s Search) does not itself directly constituent a well-
deﬁned benchmark, so in this section we explain both what
algorithms and applications are included in our suite and how
they are converted into speciﬁc benchmarks. Our benchmark-
ing suite consists of four components:
1. A set of algorithms or subroutines{A} [e.g., Grover’s
Search or the Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT)], each
with a variable input size n.
2. For each algorithmA, one or more recipes for turning
that algorithm into a set of quantum circuits{C}n for each
input problem size n. These circuits are always closely
related to, but are not necessarily identical to, the circuits
that deﬁne the algorithm. Note that these circuits are
speciﬁed using a hardware-agnostic gate set, and they
therefore must be compiled into a speciﬁc device’s native
operations before they are run (see Section III C).
3. A procedure for using a given family of circuits{C}n as
a benchmark, including a method for selecting circuits
from{C}n to run (such as sampling from a distribution
over{C}n) and, e.g., a method for varying n.
4. Methods for analyzing the data.
Below we introduce each of these components in turn. In
Section III A we state the algorithms that we have initially in-
cluded in our benchmarking suite (component 1 above). In Sec-
tion III B we discuss how we turn an algorithm into a speciﬁc
set of circuits (component 2 above), what should be consid-
ered when doing so, and the limitations of some of our current
benchmarking circuits. In Section III C we introduce the exper-
imental procedure for running a circuit set{C}n (component 3
above). In Sections III D-III G we introduce the methods for
analyzing the data (component 4 above). In Section III D we
explain how and why we present the results of the benchmark-
ing using volumetric benchmarking plots, and in Section III E
we explain how we generate ‘volumetric backgrounds’ that
are independent predictions for a quantum computer’s perfor-
mance on the application-oriented benchmarks. These plots
necessitate deﬁning a circuit’sdepth, and so in Section III F we
discuss three diﬀerent ways in a which a circuit’s depth could
be deﬁned—each with strengths and weaknesses—and state
the choice that we made in this work. The benchmarking suite
currently focuses primarily on result quality (rather than, e.g.,
time to solution) and this can be quantiﬁed in many ways. In
Section III G we discuss the merits of diﬀerent choices for this
quality metric, and introduce our choice: a normalized version
of classical ﬁdelity. Having introduced our benchmarking suite,
in Section III H we then discuss what constitutes reasonable
usage of the benchmarks, i.e., what are the rules of use?
A. The Algorithms in the Benchmarking Suite
Our benchmarking suite is based on a set of quantum al-
gorithms or applications, i.e., every benchmark in our suite
is built from a quantum algorithm. Our intention is that this
benchmarking suite will evolve over time (as has, e.g., the
SPEC benchmark suite [24, 25] for classical computers), and
a particularly important part of this evolution will be changes
in the applications and algorithms it contains. The initial set
of algorithms and applications that we chose is summarized in
Table I.
We refer to our suite as ‘application-oriented benchmarks’
(rather than ‘application benchmarks’) because our suite does
not—and is not intended to—only include complete and prac-
tically useful algorithms. This is reﬂected in the three informal
categories into which we place the algorithms we have se-
lected: ‘functional’, ‘subroutines’ and ‘tutorial’. In our suite,
we include complete algorithms that are anticipated to be use-
ful within the functional category. It could be argued that an
‘application-oriented’ benchmarking suite should only contain
benchmarks based on complete, useful algorithms—but we
do not take this position, for two reasons. First, many algo-
rithms use the same subroutines, e.g, the QFT, and so it is
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 6 =====

6
Application-Oriented Benchmarks
Deutsch-Jozsa
Tutorial Bernstein-Vazirani
Hidden Shift
Quantum Fourier Transform
Subroutine Phase Estimation
Amplitude Estimation
Grover’s Search
Hamiltonian Simulation
Functional Monte Carlo Sampling
Variational Quantum Eigensolver
Shor’s Period Finding
TABLE I. The initial set of quantum algorithms and applications
included within our application-oriented benchmarking suite. We
anticipate that the algorithms included within our suite will expand
and evolve over time, e.g., quantum error correction subroutines are
an important quantum computational primitive that are not currently
represented in this suite. We ﬁnd it useful to separate the current suite
of algorithms into three informal categories: tutorial, subroutine, and
functional.
valuable to benchmark a quantum computer’s performance on
those subroutines. This is true even if that subroutine is, on its
own, not computationally useful (e.g., the QFT with a product
state input and followed immediately by a computational basis
measurement can be eﬃciently simulated classically). This is
the motivation for including the algorithms that are within our
subroutine category.
Second, the ultimate practical applications of quantum com-
puters are currently uncertain—both the problems that quantum
computers will solve and the algorithms that will be used to
solve those problem remain unclear. Diversity in a bench-
marking suite is therefore important, i.e., the properties of the
algorithms and circuits within our benchmarking suite should
be diverse. This motivates include simple oracle algorithms
(e.g., Deutsch-Jozsa) within our suite, as, unlike most of the
other algorithms we have included, they require only shallow
(i.e., low depth) circuits. We collect these algorithms in the
tutorial category (termed as such because these algorithms are
commonly used to introduce concepts in quantum computing).
Note that the need for a diverse benchmarking suite is also an
important motivation for including many of the other nomi-
nally useful algorithms that we selected. This is because, e.g.,
Shor’s algorithm is unlikely to execute with suﬃciently low
error except when run on error corrected logical qubits—so the
main scientiﬁc reason for using Shor’s algorithm, run directly
on physical qubits, to benchmark near-term hardware is to in-
crease the diversity of the tasks with which hardware is tested.
We anticipate that as near-term (i.e., NISQ) and long-term (i.e.,
fault-tolerant error-corrected) applications of quantum com-
puters become clearer, our benchmarking suite will evolve to
reﬂect this.
B. Constructing Benchmarking Circuits
Each of our benchmarks is based on an algorithm, but an
algorithm does not itself deﬁne a unique benchmark. For ex-
ample, most algorithms are deﬁned for a large class of input
problems and a quantum computer cannot be benchmarked
by exhaustively testing every problem instance. In our bench-
marking suite, a speciﬁc benchmark A for an algorithmA is
deﬁned by a method for (1) turning that algorithm into a set
of circuits{C}n for each input problem size n, (2) selecting
Ncircs circuits to run from{C}n, and (3) selecting Nparams val-
ues for all adjustable parameters (if any) within each selected
circuitC. Applying this procedure for a speciﬁed n results
in Ncircs× Nparams ‘complete’ circuits to be run. A ‘complete’
circuit means that all gates within the circuit are speciﬁed (in-
cluding their parameter values, if any), the circuit begins with
all qubits initialized in the|0⟩ state, and the circuit ends with
a computational basis measurement of all qubits. In all cases,
the circuit set{C}n consists of a subset of the circuits that im-
plement the algorithmA or some simple adaptation of those
circuits.
For each algorithm that we chose, we designed one or more
benchmarks—deﬁned by the three ingredients above—based
on that algorithm. Complete speciﬁcations for each benchmark
are provided in Appendix A. When designing our benchmarks
we aimed to satisfy two competing criteria. Firstly, it should be
feasible to run and analyze the data produced by a benchmark.
For example, ideally a benchmark’s circuits should be designed
so that the data analysis can be implemented with polynomial
(in n) time and space classical computations—although note
that a benchmark with exponentially scaling classical compu-
tation requirements is not necessarily infeasible to run in the
near term. Second, a quantum computer’s performance on a
benchmark A built from an algorithm A should reﬂect that
computer’s performance onA as closely as possible. Satisfy-
ing both criteria is challenging, as they are conﬂicting. This is
because the quantum circuits of a useful quantum algorithm
applied to a classically intractable problem instance cannot
be eﬃciently simulated on a classical computer, so we cannot
simply compare the output of these circuits to the results of a
classical simulation. Any feasible benchmark must circumvent
this challenge.
Many of our initial benchmarks satisfy one but not both of
the above criteria. For example, our QFT(1) benchmark inputs
a random computational basis state (|x⟩ where x∈ [0..2n]) into
the standard QFT circuit, adds one to the resultant Fourier basis
state (using single qubit gates we map F|x⟩→ F|x + 1⟩ where
x + 1 is modulo 2n arithmetic and F is the QFT unitary), and
then applies the inverse QFT. The correct output bit string is
the binary representation of x + 1—which can evidently be e ﬃ-
ciently computed—so this benchmark is feasible to implement
on any number of qubits. However, this benchmark does not
test the action of the device’s imperfect implementation of the
QFT on entangled input states (although it does test the inverse
QFT’s action on entangled states), which are the input of the
QFT in all its practical applications. Conversely, some of our
other benchmarks require classical simulations that are expo-
nentially expensive in the number of qubits. Improving each
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 7 =====

7
of our benchmarks so that they all satisfying the above criteria
is important work that is already ongoing (see discussion in
Section VI).
C. The Benchmarking Procedure
Here we explain the procedure that we use to execute a
benchmark A. Executing an application benchmark A consists
of (1) choosing a range of problem sizes at which to probe per-
formance, (2) generating a set of circuits for each problem size,
which are selected from A’s circuit set{C}n using the method
speciﬁed by A, and (3) executing the circuits and measuring
key components of performance, notably the result ﬁdelity and
the execution time. We implement this methodology using
Algorithm 1:
Algorithm1 Benchmark Execution Loop
1: target← backend_id
2: initialize_metrics()
3: for problem_size← min_size, max_size do ⊿ N1
4: for circuit_id← 1, max_circuits do ⊿ N2
5: execute_classical()
6: circuit⇐ create_circuit(circuit_id)
7: circuit⇐ compile_load_circuit(circuit)
8: for params← 1, max_params do ⊿ N3
9: execute_quantum(target, circuit, params, shots)
10: end for
11: collect_circuit_metrics()
12: end for
13: collect_group_metrics()
14: end for
The algorithm deﬁnes three nested loops. The outer loop
(labelled N1) is a sweep over the range of problem sizes. The
middle loop (N2) represents multiple interleaved executions of
classical and quantum execution routines. In all our existing
benchmarks the classical routines consist solely of circuit con-
struction and compilation. In this step each of the benchmark’s
circuits is compiled into the native operations of the hardware
under test, using the provider’s compilers (our benchmarks
therefore test both the performance of the provider’s classical
compilation algorithms and the performance of the quantum
hardware). Future benchmarks may use additional classical
computation (e.g., benchmarks based on variational algorithms
that include the classical optimization loop). Each iteration
of the middle loop constructs a quantum circuit, which can
be a parameterized circuit. The inner loop ( N3) consists of
executing that circuit, for some range of parameter values if it
is a parameterized circuit. Our procedure for implementing a
benchmark explicitly contains some user-speciﬁed variables—
including the number of shots per circuit (Nshots) and the total
number of circuits at each n (Ncircs× Nparams)—and implicitly
contains much implementation freedom (e.g., the circuit com-
pilation algorithm can be chosen by the user). In Section III H
we discuss a tentative set of rules for what choices for these
explicit and implicit user-speciﬁed variables are permissible.
D. Volumetric Positioning
Our benchmarking suite usesvolumetric benchmarking plots
[23] to visualize the results of our quantum application bench-
marks. We now explain how we use volumetric benchmarking
plots (a necessary component for volumetric benchmarking
plots is deﬁning a circuit’s depth—we defer this important
point to Section III F). Each of our application-oriented bench-
marks is associated with a family of circuits that is parameter-
ized by the input problem size, i.e., each input size n deﬁnes a
circuit ensemble{C}n. Each application’s circuit family has a
particular ‘footprint’ that represents the way in which the shape
of the circuits—i.e., their width and depth—varies as a func-
tion of the input size. We can therefore report the performance
of our application benchmarks in the depth× width ‘volumet-
ric space’. In this work, for each application benchmark A a
ﬁxed input size n always corresponds to a single circuit width
w. Note that often w = n, i.e., a problem instance of size w
uses an n-qubit circuit, but this is not always the case (e.g.,
our Bernstein-Vazirani(2) benchmark uses mid-circuit
measurements to implement the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm
using n = 2 qubit circuits for any input problem size w). In
contrast, a benchmark A’s circuits can have a range of depths
for each input size. For example, the algorithms in the ‘tuto-
rial’ category use a varied-depth oracle circuit that encodes the
problem instance. We therefore use the circuits’ mean depth
to deﬁne that ensemble’s volumetric position, and we report
average performance over the circuit ensemble.
To illustrate this idea, we executed our benchmarking suite
on a quantum simulator. The lower plot of Figure 6 shows the
result ﬁdelity (see below) for a single benchmark plotted in the
volumetric space. Figure 1 shows the result ﬁdelity for each
of our benchmarks, plotted in the volumetric space and sepa-
rated into the three categories of benchmark. Each benchmark
consists of running its circuits for a range of problem sizes,
which closely correspond to the circuits’ widths. Each data
point (small rectangles) summarizes the results for the circuits
of a particular problem size. The rectangle’s location indicates
the circuits’ width and average depth, and the color indicates
the average quality of the result for that circuit shape. We quan-
tify the quality of the result using the average result ﬁdelity,
deﬁned in Section III G. The width and depth of benchmarking
circuits for diﬀerent applications can be similar, resulting in
overlap on the volumetric plots. Whenever this is the case
the result ﬁdelities from the overlapping circuits for diﬀerent
applications are averaged together. We use this averaging in
Figure 1, and throughout this paper except where stated.
E. Volumetric Backgrounds
Algorithmic benchmarks directly probe a quantum com-
puter’s performance on application-like tasks, but performance
on these tasks can also be predicted from a processor’s known
performance data (e.g., RB error rates). Discrepancies between
these predictions and experimental results can reveal the pres-
ence and size of interesting and important physical eﬀects, e.g.,
crosstalk. Throughout this work, we compare the results of
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 8 =====

8
our application-oriented benchmarks to a prediction by placing
them on top of what we call a ‘volumetric background’, shown
by the grey-scale rectangles in Figure 1. A volumetric back-
ground means a prediction for the result ﬁdelity, as a function
of circuit width and depth, obtained from some method that is
independent of our application oriented benchmarks. In Figure
1 and throughout most of this paper, we use a volumetric back-
ground that is extrapolated from the corresponding device’s
quantum volume. For visual clarity, we use a binary ‘success’
(grey squares) or ‘fail’ (white squares) background, with ‘suc-
cess’ corresponding to a result ﬁdelity of at least 1/2 [33]. We
use this type of volumetric background throughout this paper,
except where stated.
Predicting a circuit’s result ﬁdelity from a processor’s quan-
tum volume requires an extrapolation. We use the following
heuristic methodology that is arguable the best guess for the
result ﬁdelity of a width w and depth d circuit given only a
processor’s quantum volume. A widthw and depth d circuit is
predicted to have a result ﬁdelity above 1/2 if wd< (log2(VQ))2
where VQ is the quantum volume [ 10]. That is, a circuit is
predicted to succeed if its depth× width is no larger than the
largest successful quantum volume circuits. Note that here,
as throughout, we use the standardized circuit depth (see Sec-
tion III F) and with this deﬁnition for the circuit depth quantum
volume circuits are not square.
No volumetric background is likely to accurately predict the
performance of all circuits, including our application oriented
benchmarks. This is because a circuit’s performance is not
only a function of its shape, i.e., its volumetric position, as it
also depends on the type of errors present and whether those er-
rors change with time or with number of qubits. A volumetric
background inferred from a quantum volume involves particu-
larly large extrapolations, as discussed in Section IV C. For this
reason, we also include a ‘quantum volume region’ (the large
grey square in Figure 1), alongside any volumetric background
extrapolated from a quantum volume. This quantum volume
region encompasses all circuit shapes that are smaller than
the largest successful quantum volume circuit, and so circuits
within this region will have high result ﬁdelity under weaker
assumptions.
F. Circuit Depth
We will primarily present our results in the volumetric space,
meaning that a circuit’s shape, i.e., its depth and width, spec-
iﬁes where results from that circuit will appear in our plots.
Here we introduce and motivate the normalized deﬁnition for
circuit depth that we use. A circuit’s depth is the number of lay-
ers of logic gates it contains. However, any speciﬁc quantum
computation can be implemented with many diﬀerent circuits,
perhaps deﬁned over di ﬀerent gate sets, that have di ﬀerent
depths. Our benchmark circuits are deﬁned in terms of a high-
level API (such as Qiskit) and these ‘high-level circuits’ use
algorithm-speciﬁc gate sets that often contain gates that are
not directly implementable on many devices. In order to run a
high-level circuit, it must be converted (transpiled) to the set
of primitive quantum gates that the hardware executes. This
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
2 3 4 5 6 7
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0
25
50
75
100
125
150Circuit Depth
Algorithmic Depth
Normalized Depth
Benchmark Results - Quantum Fourier Transform (1) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator_7  2022-10-26 04:37:43 UTC
1 2 3 5 9 15 26 44 77132227390670 1K 2K 3K 6K10K17K30K51K
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12Circuit Width
QV=32
Quantum Fourier Transform (1)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator_7  2022-10-16 04:37:55 UTC
FIG. 6. Demonstrating our methodology. Demonstrating our
methodology by executing our QFT(1) benchmark up to 7 qubits
on a noisy quantum computer simulator. The upper plot shows the
average result ﬁdelity as a function of circuit width. The middle plot
shows both the circuit’s normalized depth (the depth of the circuit
after it has been transpiled into our standard gate set) and the circuit’s
algorithmic depth (the depth when written in the high-level API used
to deﬁne the benchmarks), as a function of circuit width. The lower
plot presents these data on a volumetric background, in order to visu-
alize the ‘footprint’ and result ﬁdelity of the benchmark circuits. In
this and all volumetric plots, the circuit depth refers to normalized
depth.
transpiled circuit’s depth—which we call the ‘physical depth’—
is often larger than the depth of the original high-level circuit.
For example, Toﬀoli gates (multiply-controlled NOT gates) are
often used in high-level descriptions of algorithms, but each
Toﬀoli gate must be decomposed into many one- and two-qubit
gates in order to run it on most quantum hardware.
As discussed in detail in Ref. [23], there are (at least) three
useful kinds of deﬁnition for a benchmarking circuit’s depth:
• Algorithmic depth. For each algorithm, express its cir-
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 9 =====

9
cuits in a canonical form using a natural, algorithm-
speciﬁc gate set. The depth of these canonical circuits is
what we call algorithmic depth. For example, there is a
well-known canonical form for the circuits of the QFT.
Similarly, Grover’s Search consists of repeating two sub-
routines (diﬀusion and oracle subroutines) which could
be considered the natural gate set for Grover’s algorithm.
• Normalized depth. Choose a basis (gate set) and a canon-
ical programmability constraints—e.g., some set of one-
and two-qubit gates with all-to-all connectivity—and
some classical compilation algorithm for transpiling a
circuit into this gate set. Normalized depth is computed
by transpiling a high-level circuit into this canonical gate
set, and computing that transpiled circuit’s depth.
• Physical depth . Transpile a high-level circuit into a
processor’s native operations. The depth of this ‘low-
level’ circuit deﬁnes the physical depth.
These three kinds of deﬁnition for a circuit’s depth have
complementary strengths and weaknesses. Using an algorithm-
speciﬁc deﬁnition for depth (‘algorithmic depth’) makes it
possible to directly connect depth to computationally-relevant
quantities, such as the number of queries to the oracle in
Grover’s algorithm. However, this kind of depth deﬁnition
makes it challenging to compare the results of di ﬀerent al-
gorithmic benchmarks. At the other extreme, physical depth
enables transparent comparison between the results of diﬀer-
ent algorithmic benchmarks on the same processor (we expect
circuits with similar physical depths to have similar result ﬁdeli-
ties). However, a particular benchmark circuit’s physical depth
varies across devices (because, e.g., it depends on a device’s
connectivity) making cross-device comparisons challenging.
Furthermore, physical depth is not always made available by
quantum computing providers, and it is not consistently de-
ﬁned as there are ambiguities in what a processor’s ‘native
operations’ are.
In this work we chose to use a particular version of normal-
ized depth. This is a device- and algorithm-independent deﬁ-
nition for depth, obtained by specifying a device-independent
basis (a gate set) to which the circuit is transpiled. The middle
plot of Figure 6 shows an example of the depth of circuits from
the QFT(1) benchmark when (1) written in a high-level API
(this is ‘algorithmic depth’) and (2) after the circuits have been
transpiled to our standard basis, i.e., the normalized depth of
the circuit. In this example, and in most of the benchmarks, the
normalized depth is larger than the circuit depth when written
in a high-level API.
The basis that we selected consists of arbitrary single-qubit
rotations around the 3 Pauli axes, a CNOT gate, and a measure-
ment gate. We assume that CNOT gates can be applied between
any pair of qubits (i.e., all qubit pairs are connected), and that
gates on distinct qubits can be applied in parallel. This gate
set, denoted by [‘rx’, ‘ry’, ‘rz’, ‘cx’] in Qiskit, is a widely used
universal basis [34] that is hardware-agnostic. Note, however,
that this (or any other) basis choice is unavoidably subjective.
Each benchmark circuit is transpiled to this basis to compute
a normalized circuit depth. Note that ﬁnding a minimal depth
compilation into this gate set is not feasible (due to the classical
computational complexity of the problem)—so the normalized
depth depends on the heuristic classical algorithm used by the
transpiler (we use Qiskit’s compilation algorithm). This is
arguably an undesirable property of normalized deﬁnitions for
depth. When executed on hardware, the circuit is (necessarily)
transpiled to the basis speciﬁc to that hardware, which will
often include the addition of qubit SW AP gates so as to respect
the topology of that hardware. Throughout this paper, ‘circuit
depth’ always refers to our normalized deﬁnition for circuit
depth unless otherwise stated.
G. Quantifying Result Quality with Circuit Fidelity
Quantum computing hardware errors are the main roadblock
to useful quantum computations, so our benchmarking suite fo-
cuses on measuring their impact on each algorithm. Currently
our benchmarking suite uses one metric to quantify result qual-
ity: a normalized version of classical ﬁdelity, introduced below,
that we refer to as ‘result ﬁdelity’. Like all options for quantify-
ing result quality, this version of ﬁdelity has both strengths and
weaknesses, and we are not advocating its exclusive adoption.
We anticipate that future versions of our benchmarking suite
will compute multiple metrics for result quality, as we discuss
further below.
Result ﬁdelity is deﬁned in terms of the observed and ideal
output probability distributions for a circuit. Each time an
n-qubit circuitC is executed on quantum computing hardware
we obtain a sample from some distribution Poutput over n-bit
strings, where Poutput(x) is the probability of observing bit
string x. This will diﬀer from the distribution Pideal that would
be sampled from ifC was run on a perfect quantum computer.
The error in the implementation ofC can therefore be quanti-
ﬁed by the discrepancy between Poutput and Pideal. There are
many complementary ways to quantify the closeness of (or
distance between) two probability distributions. The metric we
use is a normalized version of the classical ﬁdelity Fs [19, 35]
(note that classical ﬁdelity is related to the classical Hellinger
distance [36]). The classical ﬁdelity Fs is deﬁned by
Fs(Pideal, Poutput) =

∑
x
√
Poutput(x)Pideal(x)

2
. (1)
Our normalized ﬁdelity is given by
F(Pideal, Poutput) = max
{
Fraw(Pideal, Poutput), 0
}
, (2)
where
Fraw(Pideal, Poutput) = Fs(Pideal, Poutput)− Fs(Pideal, Puni)
1− Fs(Pideal, Puni) . (3)
This normalized ﬁdelity is deﬁned for all probability distri-
butions except the uniform distribution Puni—in which case
the denominator in Eq. (3) is zero—but it is poorly behaved
whenever Fs(Pideal, Puni)≈ 1. However, benchmarking circuits
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 10 =====

10
for which Fs(Pideal, Puni)≈ 1 should be avoided as whenever
Pideal is close to Puni it is diﬃcult to observe the eﬀect of errors
(as the approximate impact of many kinds of errors, includ-
ing depolarization, is to cause Poutput to be a mixture of Pideal
and Puni). Note that this does not preclude designing bench-
marks based on algorithms that, on some practically relevant
inputs, are intended to produce coherent superpositions over all
computational basis states with uniform (or close to uniform)
amplitudes. In such cases, those algorithms should be con-
verted into benchmark circuits that do not have this property.
For example, the QFT maps a computational basis state to a
uniform superposition of computational basis states, so our
QFT(1) benchmark follows the QFT by the inverse QFT, so
that these circuits’ error-free output state is a computational
basis state.
Directly computing F (or Fs) for a circuit C requires cal-
culating that circuit’sPideal on a classical computer (meaning
simulatingC) and estimating Poutput by runningC Nshots times
on the processor being tested. The classical simulation is
exponentially expensive for generalC, and the number of ex-
perimental shots (Nshots) needed for low-uncertainty estimates
of F can also grow quickly with n. This is why we aim to
design benchmarking circuits for which Pideal can be eﬃciently
computed.
The reason that we use F instead of the standard ﬁdelity
(Fs) is that Fs is non-zero even when the output of the circuit
is completely random, i.e., when Poutput = Puni. Moreover,
the value of Fs(Pideal, Puni) depends on Pideal (it depends on
the sparsity of Pideal). This is particularly inconvenient for
comparisons between the results of diﬀerent benchmarks, as
the sparsity of Pideal varies. The normalized ﬁdelity has the
property that F(Pideal, Puni) = 0, which is convenient because
errors in quantum computing hardware often cause Poutput to
converge towards Puni as circuits get larger or deeper. We have
empirically found that the normalized ﬁdelities of di ﬀerent
benchmarks, at similar circuit shapes, are more correlated than
the standard ﬁdelities are.
Any metric for result quality has strengths and weaknesses.
One inconvenient property of the normalized ﬁdelity is that its
‘raw’ versionFraw is negative if Pideal is closer to the uniform
distribution than to the observed distribution. The maximum in
Eq. (2) removes this unwanted eﬀect, but is ad hoc. Alternative
metrics for quantifying the closeness of Pideal and Poutput will
be added to our benchmarking suite in the future. Furthermore,
note that the quality with which a quantum circuit is imple-
mented can also be quantiﬁed in terms of the closeness between
the desired and actual quantum evolutions—using metrics like
quantum process ﬁdelity and diamond distance. Quantities like
process ﬁdelity are not functions of only Pideal and Poutput, as
they can only be measured by embedding a circuit C within
multiple diﬀerent contexts (e.g., ending the circuit with a va-
riety of subroutines that simulate measurements in di ﬀerent
bases). We anticipate adding techniques for measuring, e.g.,
process ﬁdelity, to our benchmarking suite in the future.
Throughout this work, ‘result ﬁdelity’ refers to the normal-
ized ﬁdelity F of Eq. (2). Typically, we average this ﬁdelity
over a circuit ensemble, which we denote by ¯F, but note that
other statistics of the set of circuits’ result ﬁdelities could also
be computed (Appendix B provides an example that highlights
the limitations of averaging). Figure 6 shows how we present
the average result ﬁdelity of a set of benchmark circuits, along
with their widths and normalized depths, using the example of
the QFT(1) benchmark run on a simulation of a noisy quan-
tum computer. The benchmark sweeps over a range of circuit
widths and computes the average result ﬁdelity for the circuits
of that width, the average depth of the original high-level cir-
cuits, and the average normalized depth, i.e., the depth of the
circuits after transpilation to the standard basis. This ﬁdelity
and depth data are shown, versus circuit width, in the upper
two plots of Figure 6. The lower plot in Figure 6 shows the
same data plotted on a volumetric background, which is the
primary method that we use to visualize our results.
H. Implementation Rules
Our benchmarking suite will likely be used to compare the
performance of diﬀerent devices and competing technologies,
so it is important to discuss what constitutes reasonable usage
of these benchmarks. Methods for benchmarking quantum
computers typically have user-adjustable aspects, which can be
both explicit inputs (i.e. adjustable variables) of the benchmark-
ing routine or details of how the benchmarks are implemented
that are not formally speciﬁed by the benchmarking procedure.
Not all choices for these variables and implementation details
will necessary constitute reasonable usage of a benchmarking
method.
Quantum computing is still an early-stage technology and
we believe that it is important to avoid prescriptive benchmark-
ing suites with inﬂexible rules. Nevertheless, we think that
it is valuable to outline some implementation principles for
our benchmarking suite that can be considered a tentative stan-
dard practice. Deviations from these suggestions may well
be reasonable and useful, but they should be justiﬁed. Our
benchmarking suite contains many distinct benchmarks, and
we anticipate that the number of benchmarks will grow in the
future. We consider it to be reasonable for a user to choose
which of these benchmarks to run. This is because di ﬀerent
benchmarks test performance on di ﬀerent tasks, and a user
might not consider all the tasks to be relevant. Note, how-
ever, that when the aim is to compare two or more devices
we strongly recommend running the same set of benchmarks
on all devices whenever feasible (for the experimental results
presented herein we did not run all our benchmarks on each
tested processor, but these results are explicitly not intended to
be used to compare diﬀerent processors).
Each individual benchmark in our suite has three important
adjustable parameters: the values of n for which performance
is tested (corresponding to the input problem size, which often
also corresponds to the number of qubits in the circuits), the
number of circuits ( Ncircs) that are selected from the bench-
marking circuit set{C}n, and the number of times each circuit
is run (Nshots). We consider it to be reasonable for a user to
choose the values of n to test, but if two or more processors
are to be tested and the results compared either (a) the same
values of n should be used for all processors, or (b) a principled
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 11 =====

11
methodology should be chosen for selecting the values of n to
use (and this methodology should be stated). For example, one
reasonable strategy is to increasen until either the result ﬁdelity
drops below a threshold value (e.g., 10%) or the maximum
number of qubits available is reached.
We recommend that the number of circuits sampled from
{C}n at each n is at least Ncircs≥ 10. Note, however, that small
values for Ncircs may sometimes be necessary to keep the total
number of circuits that need executing small—as was the case
in our experiments, where we ﬁxed Ncircs = 3 due to through-
put limitations with some hardware (for repeatability, we also
ran the same circuits on all devices that we tested, by using a
single random seed in each pseudo-random number generator).
Whenever the total number of circuits to be run is≫ 1, this is
not unreasonable as it will simply result in larger statistically
ﬂuctuations in the performance observed at a given circuit
shape (meaning that there will be more “speckle” in a volumet-
ric benchmarking plot) whenever there is signiﬁcant variation
in a processor’s result ﬁdelity on circuits within{C}n. In con-
trast, however, note that it not permissible to discard circuits
selected from{C}n, e.g., because a processor’s result ﬁdelity
on those circuits is observed to be low (i.e., post-selection of
the circuits for high result ﬁdelity). Finally, we recommend
that Nshots≥ 1000 (this recommendation was followed in all
our experiments [37]), although fewer shots per circuit may
be reasonable for many purpose (e.g., for computing average
result ﬁdelity when Ncircs≫ 1). When small values for Nshots
or Ncircs are used they should be clearly stated and, ideally,
statistical uncertainties on all estimated quantities should be
computed (currently the benchmarking suite does not automat-
ically compute standard errors).
Our benchmarking suite permits broad implementation free-
dom. One particularly important freedom is that the bench-
marking circuits can be compiled into other circuits that are
logical equivalent (i.e., they implement the same unitary evolu-
tion). This is necessary if a benchmark’s results are to reﬂect
the performance a user can expect to achieve using a provider’s
end-to-end stack. However, for benchmarks whose circuits are,
by design, eﬃciently classically simulatable, arbitrary compi-
lations cannot be permitted—because all such circuits can be
compiled into simple quantum circuits (e.g., all processing can
be oﬀ-loaded to a classical co-processor). Our current bench-
marking suite does not directly address these challenges, and
compilers designed to game these benchmarks could compress
some of our benchmarking circuits into trivial circuits (or even
oﬄoad all the computation to a classical co-processor). Ad-
dressing these challenges without forbidding all compilation is
diﬃcult, but judiciously placed “compilation barriers” within
circuits is a promising solution (this idea is discussed in detail
in Ref. [23]). In future versions of our benchmarking suite, we
anticipate encoding explicit rules for what kinds of compilation
are allowed for each benchmarking circuit—which will only
be possible if quantum computing providers facilitate these
ﬂexible and user-speciﬁable compiler restrictions.
One important role for benchmarking suites is testing and
comparing diﬀerent error mitigation or reduction strategies,
e.g., dynamically decoupled gates or zero noise extrapolation.
Some error mitigation strategies are not a scalable solution
to reducing the errors in a quantum computation, e.g., one
strategy for mitigating errors is to just replace experimental
data with data obtained by simulating a perfect quantum com-
pute. This is obviously absurd (it is infeasible for any useful
computation), and it would be unreasonable for a quantum
computing provider to employ this strategy when running a
benchmarking suite. However, it is not clear how to forbid
unreasonable error mitigation strategies while leaving room for
innovation. Instead, we advocate clear and detailed explana-
tions for all error mitigation strategies employed when running
any benchmarking suite, including this one.
IV . BENCHMARK RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this section we present results from executing our
application-oriented benchmarks on both a quantum simula-
tor (Section IV A) and a selection of physical devices (Sec-
tion IV B). All of the benchmarks in our suite have been im-
plemented using the Qiskit API. Some, but not all, have been
implemented using the Cirq and Braket APIs (see discussion in
Appendix C). Throughout, all executions of our benchmarking
suite on a quantum simulator are performed using the Qiskit
implementation of the benchmarking suite, as it provides rich
circuit analysis features. Execution on all of the hardware was
also performed using the Qiskit version of our benchmarks,
with the exception of the experiments on Rigetti Computing’s
hardware, which used the Braket version of our benchmarks.
A. Benchmark Results on a Quantum Simulator
Execution of the entire suite of benchmark programs results
in a data ﬁle that stores all of the metrics collected for the tested
device. Plotting all of the accumulated average result ﬁdelity
data on a single volumetric background produces charts like
the ones shown in Figure 7, which were generated by running
our benchmarks on the Qiskit Aer simulator. These simulations
used all-to-all connectivity between the qubits, and a simple
error model in which each n-qubit gate was subject to n-qubit
depolarizing errors, for n = 1, 2. For the simulation that gen-
erated the upper plot of Figure 7, the one- and two-qubit gate
error rates were 0.003 and 0.03, respectively. These error rates
are similar to those found in some current devices (although
note that current devices suﬀer more complex, structured forms
of error than pure depolarization). The quantum volume was
determined to be 32, by executing the quantum volume pro-
tocol directly on this simulator, and this was used to generate
the volumetric background (see Section III D). For the lower
plot of Figure 7, the one- and two-qubit gate error rates were
0.0005 and 0.005, respectively, resulting in a quantum volume
of 2048.
For both plots in Figure 7, there is close agreement between
the average result ﬁdelities of all the application benchmarks.
There is also close agreement between the application bench-
marks and the volumetric background. This is expected here
due to the simplicity of the error model and the use of all-to-all
connectivity. For more complex errors (e.g., coherent errors)
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 12 =====

12
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
QV=32
Bernstein-Vazirani (1)
Deutsch-Jozsa
Hidden Shift
Hamiltonian Simulation
Phase Estimation
Quantum Fourier Transform (1)
VQE Simulation (1)
Amplitude Estimation
Monte Carlo Sampling (2)
Shor's Order Finding (1)
Grover's Search
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator-current  2022-10-16 04:37:56 UTC
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
QV=2048
Bernstein-Vazirani (1)
Deutsch-Jozsa
Hidden Shift
Hamiltonian Simulation
Phase Estimation
Quantum Fourier Transform (1)
VQE Simulation (1)
Amplitude Estimation
Monte Carlo Sampling (2)
Shor's Order Finding (1)
Grover's Search
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator-future  2022-10-16 04:36:22 UTC
FIG. 7. Demonstrating our benchmarks on a quantum simulator.
Results from running our suite of application-oriented benchmarks on
a quantum simulator (colored squares) on top of a volumetric back-
ground (grey-scale squares) extrapolated from the quantum volume.
The simulator uses all-to-all qubit connectivity and two diﬀerent error
rate scales (details in main text) that result in quantum volumes of
32 and 2048, as shown in each plot. Each volumetric background
is extrapolated from the quantum volume using a simple heuristic
(see Section III D) that is designed to predict the regions in which a
circuit’s result ﬁdelity will be above1/2.
the exact structure of a circuit can impact its performance, as
errors can, e.g., coherently add or cancel [8]. This means that
circuits of the same shape can have very diﬀerent performance,
potentially resulting in signiﬁcant di ﬀerences between a de-
vice’s performance on diﬀerent applications. Similarly, if there
is limited qubit connectivity, after a circuit is transpiled to a
device’s primitive gates there can be an increase in the circuit
depth that is large and strongly dependent on both the appli-
cation and the device’s connectivity. This can cause a sharper
decrease in performance with increasing circuit width than
anticipated by a volumetric background extrapolated from the
quantum volume (using our simple heuristic), and this result
ﬁdelity decrease can be application dependent. We observe
some of these eﬀects in our experimental results.
B. Benchmark Results on Quantum Hardware
In this section we present the results of executing our
application-oriented benchmarks on various providers’ hard-
ware. This section is not intended to perform or highlight
comparisons between diﬀerent systems, but rather to demon-
strate our benchmarking suite. Quantum computing hardware
is changing rapidly, and we did not have access to the lat-
est hardware from all providers. Any comparisons would be
quickly outdated, and therefore potentially misleading or erro-
neous. Here we present a few representative samples of results
and highlight several conclusions that we can draw from these
results.
Rigetti Computing
One of the ﬁrst quantum computers available to the public
was provided by Rigetti Computing. Rigetti’s devices are based
on superconducting qubit technology, and they can be accessed
using the Amazon Braket Service [21]. Here, we show results
obtained from executing a subset of our benchmarks on Rigetti
Aspen-9, which is a 32-qubit machine [38], using the Amazon
Braket version of our benchmarks.
Figure 8 shows the result ﬁdelity as a function of the cir-
cuit width (the number of qubits) obtained when running the
Hidden Shift and QFT(2) benchmarks on Rigetti Aspen-9.
The Hidden Shift benchmark was executed on the ﬁrst 8
qubits of Aspen-9. The QFT(2) benchmark was executed on
only the ﬁrst 6 qubits of Aspen-9. This was because, as shown
in Figure 8, the result ﬁdelity became negligible at around 5-6
qubits.
The result ﬁdelity decreases as the circuit width increases,
as expected. There are numerous factors that contribute to
the precise form of the result ﬁdelity decay that we observe,
including the qubit connectivity. This is because, in general,
these benchmarks use controlled rotation gates between non-
connected qubits, which must be implemented using multiple
two-qubit gates between pairs of connected qubits.
This is a fundamental consequence of limited qubit con-
nectivity, but note that none of our benchmarks are tailored to
utilize the subset of qubits in a device that have the best connec-
tivity for the given application. Instead, the results represent
what a user would experience when executing applications
using the qubits 1 through n, for an n-qubit circuit—although
note that a provider’s compiler can employ intelligent qubit
selection strategies (see discussion in Section IV D).
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 13 =====

13
2 4 6 8
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
Benchmark Results - Hidden Shift - Braket
Device=qpu_rigetti_Aspen-9  2021-09-22 22:47:03 UTC
2 3 4 5 6
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
Benchmark Results - Quantum Fourier Transform (2) - Braket
Device=qpu_rigetti_Aspen-9  2021-09-23 16:04:10 UTC
FIG. 8. Demonstrating two benchmarks on Rigetti Aspen-9. The
result ﬁdelity observed when running our Hidden Shift benchmark
(upper plot) and QFT(2) benchmark (lower plot) on Rigetti Aspen-9.
For each benchmark, we show the average result ﬁdelity as a function
of circuit width (the number of qubits). ( Data collected via cloud
service.)
IBM Quantum
IBM Quantum provides a large selection of quantum com-
puting devices through IBM Quantum Services [28]. IBM Q’s
devices are based on superconducting qubit technology. Below
we present results from several of those machines. Note that
there are larger and more recent IBM Q systems, including
systems that have larger quantum volumes than those that we
tested.
Figure 9 shows results from running the QFT(2) benchmark
on IBM Q Casablanca, which is a 7 qubit device. We show the
average result ﬁdelity and average circuit depth as a function
of the circuit width (the number of qubits). The lower plot of
the ﬁgure shows both the normalized circuit depth (which is
what ‘circuit depth’ refers to throughout this paper unless oth-
erwise stated) and the depth of the circuits when written in the
high-level API used to deﬁne the benchmark (see Section III).
Note that neither of these depths correspond to the depth of
the circuits after they have been transpiled to the device’s na-
tive operations (i.e., the circuit’s physical depth), which will
typically be larger.
Figure 10 shows the results of running a subset of the bench-
marking suite on IBM Q Casablanca and IBM Q Guadalupe.
IBM Q Casablanca and IBM Q Guadalupe are 7 and 16 qubit
devices, respectively, that both have a quantum volume of
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
2 3 4 5 6 7
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0
20
40
60
80Circuit Depth
Algorithmic Depth
Normalized Depth
Benchmark Results - Quantum Fourier Transform (2) - Qiskit
Device=ibmq_casablanca  2022-10-26 04:37:25 UTC
FIG. 9. Demonstrating a QFT-based benchmark on IBM Q
Casablanca. Results from running the QFT(2) benchmark, the sec-
ond of our two QFT-based benchmarks, on IBM Q Casablanca. The
upper and lower plots show the average result ﬁdelity and circuit
depth, respectively, as a function of circuit width (the number of
qubits). (Data collected via cloud service.)
32. Some of these benchmarks use circuits with a depth of
well over 1000 (e.g., Grover’s Search benchmark), and we
observed low result ﬁdelities for all such circuits. All appli-
cation circuits whose volumetric positions are in the region
predicted to have low result ﬁdelity by the volumetric back-
ground (white squares and blank region) do have low result
ﬁdelities. However, there are application circuits with low
result ﬁdelities (e.g., red squares) whose volumetric positions
fall within the high result ﬁdelity region of the volumetric back-
ground (grey squares). We observe that performance drops oﬀ
with increasing width much more quickly than predicted by
the volumetric background. This is likely primarily because
this volumetric background is extrapolated from the quantum
volume using a simple heuristic that does not account for a
device’s connectivity. This could potentially be addressed with
a more sophisticated heuristic, or by instead using measured
volumetric backgrounds (see Section IV C).
Mid-circuit measurement and qubit reset to make qubits
reusable is a recent quantum computing enhancement, and
IBM has introduced this feature for some of their systems. Our
benchmark suite has been designed so that it can be adapted
to include circuits that utilize mid-circuit measurements, as
we now brieﬂy demonstrate. As we review in Appendix D 1,
the eﬀect of this advance is that certain applications can be
implemented with circuits over fewer qubits, as qubits can
be reused. Figure 11 shows the results of executing two
benchmarks, constructed from the Bernstein-Vazirani algo-
rithm, on IBM Q Lagos, which is a 7 qubit device. In both
versions of the benchmark the algorithm’s input is an n bit
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 14 =====

14
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12Circuit Width
QV=32
Bernstein-Vazirani (1)
Deutsch-Jozsa
Hidden Shift
Hamiltonian Simulation
Quantum Fourier Transform (2)
Phase Estimation
Quantum Fourier Transform (1)
Monte Carlo Sampling (2)
Grover's Search
Amplitude Estimation
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=ibmq_casablanca  2022-10-26 03:57:49 UTC
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
QV=32
Bernstein-Vazirani
Quantum Fourier Transform (2)
Quantum Fourier Transform (1)
VQE Simulation (1)
Amplitude Estimation
Grover's Search
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=ibmq_guadalupe  2022-10-16 04:38:05 UTC
FIG. 10. Benchmarking results on IBM Q Casablanca and
Guadalupe. The result ﬁdelities obtained when running subsets of
our benchmarking suite on IBM Q Casablanca and IBM Q Guadalupe.
The volumetric backgrounds (grey squares) extrapolated from each
device’s quantum volume (32 in both cases) do not accurately pre-
dict the performance of wide circuits on IBM Q Guadalupe. ( Data
collected via cloud service.)
integer, and on IBM Q Lagos n ranges from 2 to 6. In the
Bernstein-Vazirani(1) benchmark, an n bit integer input
uses an n + 1 qubit circuit, so the circuit widths range from 3 to
7. In the Bernstein-Vazirani(2) benchmark, an n bit inte-
ger input uses only 2 qubits for alln, one of which is repeatedly
reset and reused with the aid of mid-circuit measurements. This
results in width 2 circuits for all n. In Figure 11 we observe
that the result ﬁdelity drops precipitously when the width of the
circuit exceeds 5, which places it outside the quantum volume
region (the grey rectangle). In the Bernstein-Vazirani(2)
benchmark, the circuits’ widths do not exceed 2, and we ob-
serve a larger result ﬁdelity for the same problem instances.
This illustrates the potential value of mid-circuit measurements
for increasing an algorithm’s result ﬁdelity.
1 2 3 4 7 10 17 27 43 69110176281450721 1K 2K 3K 5K 8K12K
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12Circuit Width
QV=32
Bernstein-Vazirani (1)
Bernstein-Vazirani (2)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=ibm_lagos  2022-10-15 20:22:39 UTC
FIG. 11. Benchmarks that use mid-circuit measurements.
Results from running the Bernstein-Vazirani(1) and
Bernstein-Vazirani(2) benchmarks on IBM Q Lagos. These
benchmarks are based on two di ﬀerent implementations of the
Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm: Bernstein-Vazirani(1) uses n + 1
qubit circuits for n-bit inputs, whereas Bernstein-Vazirani(2)
uses mid-circuit measurements to reuse one of the qubits, and
therefore needs only 2 qubits for any size input. Both benchmarks
use the same random 2-6 bit algorithm inputs. We observe higher
result ﬁdelity when using mid-circuit measurements to reduce the
width of the circuits. (Data collected via cloud service.)
Quantinuum
Quantinuum System Model H1.1 was released commercially
in 2020 [39]. This quantum computing system currently en-
codes up to 12 qubits in trapped atomic ions using the quantum
charged coupled architecture [40]. The qubits are fully con-
nected by using ion transport operations to rearrange the ions
to interact any pair of qubits. The system has an average
single-qubit gate ﬁdelity of 99.99(1)% and average two-qubit
gate ﬁdelity of 99.70(5)%, as measured using standard ran-
domized benchmarking [41]. The system is also capable of
applying high-ﬁdelity mid-circuit measurement and reset to
any qubit [42].
Figure 12 shows the results of executing a subset of our
application-oriented benchmarks on the Quantinuum H1-1.
For these tests the code was slightly edited to more eas-
ily run with the Quantinuum API but the qiskit version is
also supported. These results show that the Quantinuum
system can run 12-qubit, moderate-depth circuits that con-
tain interactions between many pairs of qubits and still ob-
tain moderate to high ﬁdelity results. Furthermore, these
results are broadly consistent with the component-level ﬁ-
delities measured by one- and two-qubit randomized bench-
marking. The Bernstein-Vazirani(1), Hidden-Shift,
and Hamiltonian Simulation benchmarks all return high-
ﬁdelity results ( ¯F≥ 0.77) for all qubit numbers up to the 12
qubit system size limit. Benchmarks that require deeper cir-
cuits, such as the QFT(1) and QFT(2) benchmarks and the
Phase Estimation benchmark, still produce results that are
distinguishable from random outputs. The smallest ﬁdelity for
the QFT (1) was ¯F = 0.07, which was obtained for the case
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 15 =====

15
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
QV=1024
Bernstein-Vazirani (1)
Hidden Shift
Hamiltonian Simulation
Quantum Fourier Transform (2)
Phase Estimation
Quantum Fourier Transform (1)
Amplitude Estimation
Monte Carlo Sampling (2)
Bernstein-Vazirani (2)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=Quantinuum-H1.1  2022-10-16 04:38:09 UTC
FIG. 12. Benchmark results on Quantinuum’s H1.1. The result
ﬁdelities obtained when running our benchmarking suite on H1.1,
which is a 12-qubit device. Each benchmark was run with 500 shots
and at most ﬁve random circuits per qubit number. For all wide and
shallow circuits the result ﬁdelity is high. Quantinuum has measured
the quantum volume of this device to be 1024 [ 43], and this value
is used to construct the volumetric background region. The volu-
metric background is broadly predictive of the performance of our
algorithmic benchmarks. (Data collected by Quantinuum in-house.)
of n = 12. Overall, we observe that the volumetric background
extrapolated from a quantum volume of 1024 [ 43] provides
a broadly, but not entirely, accurate prediction of the perfor-
mance of our algorithmic benchmarks.
The H1.1 can implement mid-circuit measurement
and reset operations, which we benchmarked using the
Bernstein-Vazirani(2) benchmark. We see that while
both our benchmarks based on the Bernstein-Vazirani
algorithm achieve high ﬁdelity results ( ¯F > 0.929),
Bernstein-Vazirani(2) performs slightly better than
Bernstein-Vazirani(1) for larger register size. The
Bernstein-Vazirani(2) benchmark can also be imple-
mented for larger algorithm input sizes ( n > 12) as it only
uses two qubits for any input, although we did not do this
in our experiments, whereas the Bernstein-Vazirani(1)
benchmark is limited to n≤ 12 due to the machine’s current
restriction to 12 qubits.
IonQ
IonQ is a provider of quantum computers that are available
via Amazon Braket [26], Microsoft Azure Quantum [22] and
Google Cloud [44]. IonQ systems support most leading quan-
tum programming environments, and we executed our bench-
marks on the IonQ system using the Qiskit provider module
supplied by IonQ. Their hardware utilizes trapped ytterbium
ions where qubits are encoded in two states of the ground
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
Bernstein-Vazirani (1)
Deutsch-Jozsa
Hidden Shift
Hamiltonian Simulation
Quantum Fourier Transform (2)
Phase Estimation
Quantum Fourier Transform (1)
VQE Simulation (1)
Amplitude Estimation
Grover's Search
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=ionq_qpu  2022-10-16 04:38:12 UTC
FIG. 13. Benchmark results on IonQ’s cloud-accessible system.
The result ﬁdelities obtained when running our benchmarking suite on
IonQ’s Harmony cloud-accessible system, which features 11 qubits.
For all wide and shallow circuits the result ﬁdelity is high. IonQ does
not publish a quantum volume for this device, and we did not measure
it directly, so we do not include a volumetric background in this plot.
(Data collected via cloud service.)
hyperﬁne manifold. The IonQ system currently on the cloud
consists of 11 qubits that are fully connected.
Figure 13 shows results from executing a subset of the
application-oriented benchmarks on the IonQ system. IonQ
does not publish a quantum volume metric for this device, and
we chose not to run the quantum volume circuits on any of
the tested hardware. In Figure 13 we observe high-ﬁdelity
results for the Bernstein-Vazirani(1), Deutsch-Jozsa
and Hidden Shift benchmarks for all qubit numbers, up to
the current system limit of n = 11. For benchmarks that
use deeper circuits we observe a steeper decrease in result
ﬁdelity with n, and the observed performance is broadly, but
not entirely, consistent with the predictions of the volumetric
background.
IonQ has recently introduced its next-generation quantum
hardware [45]. This hardware is purported to feature an or-
der of magnitude reduction in gate error rates in comparison
to IonQ’s current system on the cloud. Figure 14 shows the
results from running a subset of our benchmarking suite on
this device, including benchmarks from all 3 categories in
Table I. We observe a signiﬁcant increase in performance
in comparison to the previous generation hardware, as is
apparent by comparing Figs. 13 and 14. For instance, the
Bernstein-Vazirani(1) benchmark is run for up to 21
qubits, and the result ﬁdelity for the largest circuit is 70%. This
can be compared with the result ﬁdelity for the largest circuit
for the Bernstein Vazirani(1) benchmark on the cloud
quantum computer, which is 78% for 11 qubits. Note that the
maximum width and depth of theHamiltonian Simulation
and Phase Estimation benchmark circuits here exceeds that
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 16 =====

16
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23Circuit Width
Bernstein-Vazirani (1)
Hamiltonian Simulation
Phase Estimation
Quantum Fourier Transform (1)
Amplitude Estimation
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=ionq_qpu_2  2022-10-16 04:38:14 UTC
FIG. 14. Benchmark results on IonQ’s Aria system. The result
ﬁdelities obtained when running our benchmarking suite on up to 21
qubits of IonQ’s Aria system. We observe a signiﬁcant performance
improvement in comparison to the previous generation of IonQ hard-
ware. IonQ does not publish a quantum volume for this device, and
we did not measure it directly, so we do not include a volumetric
background in this plot. (Data collected by IonQ in-house.)
in all other IonQ experiments, as here we tested up to 14 qubits.
Compatible Hardware
Our application-oriented benchmarking suite is designed to
be applicable to any gate-based quantum computer, and our im-
plementation of that suite is applicable to any platform that can
be interfaced with Qiskit, Cirq, Braket, or Q#. Table II contains
a non-exhaustive list of hardware that that we did not test in
this work but that is compatible with our implementation of our
benchmarking suite. Note that support for diﬀerent quantum
hardware devices by these programming environments will
evolve over time.
Hardware Programming Environment
Google QCS Cirq
Alpine Quantum Qiskit
Technologies Cirq
TABLE II. The Application-Oriented Benchmark Suite introduced
in this work can be executed on other quantum computing hardware,
using the programming environments speciﬁed.
C. Comparison to Generic Benchmarks
In this work we have compared results from our application-
oriented benchmarks with a volumetric background. As intro-
duced in Section III D, a volumetric background is a prediction
for the result ﬁdelity of circuits, as a function of circuit shape
(i.e., volumetric position), that is constructed from the results
of some independent benchmark or performance data. So far
in this paper, we have considered only volumetric backgrounds
that are extrapolated from a single performance metric: the
quantum volume.
Our simulated and experimental results show that this extrap-
olated volumetric background can provide reasonably accurate
predictions of application performance in some instances (par-
ticularly with all-to-all connectivity devices) but not always.
There are many reasons why we should not expect our vol-
umetric background extrapolated from the quantum volume
to always accurately predict performance, including: (1) the
extrapolation uses a very simple heuristic that does not account
for device connectivity (see Section III D), and (2) we often
extrapolate the quantum volume to predict the performance of
circuits containing signiﬁcantly more qubits than were used in
any of the quantum volume circuits.
Predictions of the performance of a suite of algorithmic
benchmarks from a single number, like the quantum volume,
are unlikely to be consistently accurate—due to the complexi-
ties of quantum computer’s errors and their interactions with
other characteristics of a processor (e.g., connectivity). Fur-
thermore, it is diﬃcult for any generic benchmark to reliably
predict the performance of a diverse suite of algorithms. To
understand why, below we brieﬂy explore one alternative to
volumetric backgrounds based on the quantum volume: a vol-
umetric background created by running ‘randomized mirror
circuits’ [8]. For this illustrative comparison, we focus on
a single device, IBM Q Casablanca, and the particular class
of randomized mirror circuits used in Ref. [8]. Figure 15 (a)
shows the result ﬁdelities obtained when running randomized
mirror circuits on IBM Q Casablanca.
We use the data in Figure 15 (a) to construct a volumet-
ric background by (1) using the average result ﬁdelity for
randomized mirror circuits of a given shape as our predictor
for the performance of other circuits of this shape, and (2)
extrapolating this to all circuit depths using the theory for
randomized mirror circuits presented in [ 46]. This volumet-
ric background is shown in Figure 15, alongside the average
result ﬁdelities of three of our application benchmarks: the
Bernstein-Vazirani(1) benchmark, the QFT(1) bench-
mark, and the Grover’s Search benchmark. To facilitate
a more precise comparison to the results of the application-
oriented benchmarks, here we (1) do not average together the
results for application-oriented benchmarks with similar vol-
umetric positions, and (2) we use a color-scale volumetric
background. The general trend of all three benchmarks and
the volumetric background are unsurprisingly in agreement:
result ﬁdelity decreases with increasing circuit width and depth.
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 17 =====

17
FIG. 15. Comparing mirror circuit and application-oriented
benchmarks. (a) Results from running randomized mirror circuits
[8] on IBM Q Casablanca. At each circuit shape 40 circuits were
sampled and run. The maximum, average, and minimum result ﬁ-
delity that was observed at each circuit shape is shown, in concentric
squares. (b) The average result ﬁdelity of the mirror circuits is extrap-
olated to arbitrary depths to create a volumetric background (squares),
and compared to the results from running a subset of the application
benchmarks on IBM Q Casablanca (diamonds, circles and stars). We
observe good correlation between the di ﬀerent benchmarks at low
width, but an increasing discrepancy between the volumetric back-
ground and the applications as the circuit width increases. This is
likely primarily due to the diﬀerent frequency with which gates be-
tween non-connected qubits are used in the four diﬀerent benchmarks.
Mirror circuit benchmarks that mimic the frequency with which a
particular algorithms uses gates between non-connected qubits might
reduce this discrepancy, which would result in a randomized bench-
mark that is no longer algorithm agnostic, but this is not explored
herein.
However, there are substantial diﬀerences between the rates at
which the performance of each type of circuit drops oﬀ with
increasing circuit size.
There are multiple possible reasons for the observed discrep-
ancy between the result ﬁdelity of randomized mirror circuits
and algorithmic benchmarks. Perhaps the most important is
that each of the four circuit families (the three algorithms and
the randomized mirror circuits) requires a diﬀerent number of
physical two-qubit gates at a ﬁxed normalized circuit depth.
When transpiled into the standardized gate set with all-to-all
connectivity (which is used to deﬁne normalized circuit depth)
each circuit family will use a diﬀerent average number of two-
qubit gates at ﬁxed depth d. Furthermore, the rate that each
pair of qubits are coupled in these circuits will vary, and so
each circuit family will incur a diﬀerent CNOT overhead when
it is transpiled to the physical gate set of IBM Q Casablanca
(which has limited connectivity). The randomized mirror cir-
cuits incur no CNOT overhead at this transpilation stage, as
they were designed to contain only CNOT gates between con-
nected qubits. This is a compelling explanation for why the
predictions from the randomized mirror circuits are systemati-
cally over-optimistic. The physical CNOT count discrepancy
will typically increase with the number of qubits (i.e., circuit
width), which explains the faster result ﬁdelity decrease with
circuit width that we observe for the application benchmarks
versus the randomized mirror circuit. It is possible to design
randomized mirror circuits that use the same number of phys-
ical CNOT gates as any given application benchmark (on av-
erage and at a given depth d), but this physical CNOT density
varies between algorithmic benchmarks—so any randomized
benchmark that is designed to match this density is no longer
algorithm agnostic.
The discrepancies between the results of our application-
oriented benchmarks and both the volumetric backgrounds in-
ferred from randomized mirror circuit data and from a device’s
quantum volume are indicative of the challenges associated
with predicting algorithm performance from generic bench-
marks. One way to potentially remove the discrepancy we ob-
serve in Figure 15 is to use physical depth to deﬁne a circuit’s
volumetric position. This would mean that an application’s
volumetric ‘footprint’ will be device-dependent (something we
choose to avoid in this work). We leave an investigation of this
to future work.
D. Impact of Compiler Optimization Techniques
In our experiments on hardware, the benchmarks were inten-
tionally run using the provider’s default settings for the tran-
spilation and execution of the circuits. This is how many users
work with a programming system, even a quantum one. Many
of quantum computing programming packages oﬀer compila-
tion options that will modify the circuits before execution to
account for device characteristics, such as qubit connectivity
or timing parameters. While using these parameters can result
in better performance, it is often di ﬃcult for users to know
which parameters should be used or what values to choose for
each target device. Providers also may elect to deliberately
exclude automatic optimization techniques to avoid interfering
with users’ custom optimizations. The result can be that users
fail to obtain the best possible performance from a vendor’s
hardware by default.
Figure 16 illustrates the impact of a simple compiler opti-
mization and layout strategy as applied to execution on the IBM
Q Guadalupe device. Note that the ﬁdelity obtained for circuits
that are wide and shallow is signiﬁcantly improved using this
strategy because it optimizes the layout of the circuit for the
qubit connectivity of the device. In this case, the Qiskit exe-
cution method was conﬁgured to use optimization_level = 3,
which provides the highest circuit optimization but at the ex-
pense of longer execution time for the classical circuit op-
timizer [19]. Additionally, the execution was conﬁgured to
use layout_method = ‘sabre′ and routing_method = ‘sabre′,
which apply information about the connectivity of the target de-
vice to layout the circuit and route interactions between qubits
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 18 =====

18
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12Circuit Width
QV=32
Bernstein-Vazirani (1)
Deutsch-Jozsa
Hidden Shift
Hamiltonian Simulation
Quantum Fourier Transform (2)
Phase Estimation
Quantum Fourier Transform (1)
VQE Simulation (1)
Grover's Search
Amplitude Estimation
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=ibmq_casablanca-opt3-sabre  2022-10-26 04:07:46 UTC
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
QV=32
Bernstein-Vazirani (1)
Hamiltonian Simulation
Quantum Fourier Transform (2)
Phase Estimation
Quantum Fourier Transform (1)
VQE Simulation (1)
Amplitude Estimation
Grover's Search
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=ibmq_guadalupe-opt3-sabre  2022-10-16 04:38:20 UTC
FIG. 16. Benchmarking results on IBM Q Casablanca and
Guadalupe with compiler optimizations. The result ﬁdelities ob-
tained when running a subset of our benchmarking suite on the IBM Q
Casablanca and Guadalupe systems using the compiler optimization
strategy deﬁned in the text. There is an improvement in result ﬁdelity
for wide circuits, as compared with the results shown in Figure 10.
(Data collected via cloud service.)
optimally.
On the H1.1 system we experimented with using arbitrary
angle two-qubit gates to implement the QFT(1) and QFT(2)
benchmarks. As shown in Fig. 17, these circuit optimiza-
tions increased the results ﬁdelity. In trapped-ion systems,
two-qubit gates are typically implemented with the Mølmer-
Sørenson interaction. In most cases, the resulting gate is pro-
duced with a ﬁxed laser power that ideally results in the uni-
tary exp[−i(π/4)XX], which is equivalent to CNOT up to lo-
cal unitaries. A controlled- Z(θ) operation, which appears in
many of the application oriented benchmarks, requires two
CNOTs. The Mølmer-Sørenson gate can also be implemented
with an arbitrary angle exp[−i(φ/2)XX] by varying the laser
power as a function of φ. The resulting gate is equivalent to
a controlled-Z(θ) gate up to local unitaries. This modiﬁca-
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
0.0
0.5
1.0Avg Fidelity
Benchmark Results - Quantum Fourier Transform (1) and (2)
Device=Quantinuum H1.1 2021-12-18 17:38:21 UTC
Fixed angles
Arb. angles
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0.0
0.5
1.0Avg Fidelity
FIG. 17. Benchmarking results on Quantinuum’s H1.1 with com-
piler optimizations. The result ﬁdelities obtained when running a
subset of our benchmarking suite on H1.1 using arbitrary angles. For
both QFT-based benchmarks the number of two-qubit interactions is
roughly cut in half and the errors are further reduced by decreasing
the angle of two-qubit rotations. ( Data collected by Quantinuum
in-house.)
tion halves the number of two-qubit interactions required to
implement controlled-Z(θ) (for most θ) and may further de-
crease two-qubit errors that scale with φ. From the QFT(1)
and QFT(2) benchmarks plotted in Fig. 17, we can verify that
the arbitrary angle gates are yielding a signiﬁcant improve-
ment. For example, for QFT(1) without arbitrary angle gates
the ﬁdelity for n = 12 qubits was 0.07 but with the arbitrary
angle gates it had a 3× improvement to 0.216.
V . MEASURING EXECUTION TIME
Most existing quantum computing benchmarks focus on
measuring result quality, but the time taken to run an applica-
tion is also an important metric of performance [ 47–50]. In
particular, the time to solution is a crucial metric when com-
paring quantum and classical computations, e.g., comparing
quantum and classical compute times was central to recent
demonstrations of quantum advantage [2, 3]. Our benchmark-
ing suite is designed to quantify various aspects of the time
to solution, as we explain below. In Section V A we discuss
how to measure and subdivide the total execution time. In
Section V B we then turn to the component of execution time
that our benchmarking suite currently focuses on: the time
taken to execute the quantum circuits.
A. Total Execution Time
The total time required to execute a complete quantum ap-
plication is evidently a critical aspect of a quantum computer’s
performance. In order to understand a quantum computer’s per-
formance in detail, the total execution time should ideally be
divided into the times taken for distinct sub-tasks (e.g., circuit
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 19 =====

19
compilation), and an ideal benchmarking suite would measure
each such time. In general, a quantum application is a hybrid
quantum-classical computation consisting of running one or
more quantum circuits interleaved with classical processing.
We therefore suggest that the following non-exhaustive set of
sub-tasks and associated compute times will be important to
measure:
1. Compilation time (tcompile)—the time spent compiling
an application’s circuits, written in a high-level language
(e.g., Q# or Qiskit), into the hardware’s native operations
and language (e.g., OpenQASM, or perhaps the pulse-
level description of the circuit).
2. Classical computation time ( tclassical)—the time spent
implementing classical computations to, e.g., process
data from quantum circuits already run (as in variational
algorithms [51–53]).
3. Quantum execution time ( tquantum(N))—the time re-
quired for N shots of a circuit. This is the only time
that we report on in this work.
An additional component in the total execution time when us-
ing shared-usage cloud-access quantum hardware is the queu-
ing time, i.e., the time that circuits spend in a queue waiting to
be executed. This is an artifact of shared-usage access models,
and arguably its main importance here is that it can complicate
reliable measurements of other aspects of the total execution
time.
To illustrate the potential utility of measuring diﬀerent com-
ponents of total execution time, we consider one aspect of
running variational quantum algorithms. These algorithms
involve repeated execution of a parameterized circuit for dif-
ferent parameter values. There are two distinct ways in which
these circuits, that diﬀer only in the parameter values, can be
implemented. Each such circuit can be recompiled from a
high-level language description (incurring the tcompile cost each
time), or a single parameterized circuit can be compiled with
its parameters set and updated using low-level classical con-
trols. These two methods for running parameterized circuits
will result in di ﬀerent compute times, and avoiding recom-
pilation could potentially result in substantial compute time
savings. Our Variational Quantum Eigensolver bench-
mark has been designed to enable this comparison, by looping
over multiple instances of a circuit with di ﬀering parameter
values. Furthermore, we suggest that benchmarks that can
reveal and quantify other potential improvements in compute
time will be important tools for testing and improving quantum
computers.
B. Quantum Execution Time
The aspect of execution time that our current benchmarking
suite focuses on is quantum execution time tquantum(N). This
is the time taken to run N ‘shots’ of a quantum circuit (as the
results from quantum circuits are probabilistic in nature, they
are each typically run many times, with an individual circuit
execution referred to as a ‘shot’). The quantum execution time
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0
2
4
6
8
10Avg Execution Time (sec)
Benchmark Results - Quantum Fourier Transform (1) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator_15  2021-09-22 22:40:27 UTC
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0
2
4
6
8
10Avg Execution Time (sec)
Benchmark Results - Quantum Fourier Transform (1) - Qiskit
Device=ibmq_guadalupe_15  2021-09-22 22:40:30 UTC
FIG. 18. Measuring quantum execution time. The average quan-
tum execution time observed when running the QFT(1) benchmark
up to 15 qubits, with N = 1000 shots, on a Qiskit Aer simulation of a
noisy quantum computer (upper plot) and IBM Q Guadalupe (lower
plot). (Data collected via cloud service.)
depends on both the circuit (e.g., it will increase with the circuit
depth), and on the number of shots N. In our experiments we
use N = 1000, and we do not study the dependence of tquantum
on N. Note that is important to use the same value of N when
comparing diﬀerent devices.
The quantum execution time is not directly accessible to a
quantum computer user, but cloud quantum computers typi-
cally return a quantity that is analogous to tquantum(N), follow-
ing the execution of the quantum circuit. This time is recorded
by our benchmarking suite, and it is what we report. Note,
however, that the precise meaning of the timing information
returned by a provider’s API is not always clear to the end
user (and is possibly di ﬀerent for diﬀerent providers). This
should be kept in mind when comparing quantum execution
time results between platforms.
Figure 18 shows the average time to execute the circuits of
the QFT(1) benchmark, as a function of circuit width, for a
quantum simulator and for IBM Q Guadalupe. The execution
time increases exponentially on the simulator, and linearly on
this quantum hardware. Note that the exponential growth in the
time to simulate these circuits does not imply that these circuits
are classically hard to simulate [ 54], only that this classical
simulator exhibits exponential simulation time scaling on these
circuits.
Figure 19 shows results from running the same QFT(1)
benchmark on Rigetti Aspen-9 and IBM Q Casablanca. The av-
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 20 =====

20
2 3 4 5 6 7
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5Avg Execution Time (sec)
Benchmark Results - Quantum Fourier Transform (1) - Braket
Device=qpu_rigetti_Aspen-9  2021-09-22 22:42:35 UTC
2 3 4 5 6 7
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0
2
4
6
8Avg Execution Time (sec)
Benchmark Results - Quantum Fourier Transform (1) - Qiskit
Device=ibmq_casablanca  2021-09-22 22:41:54 UTC
FIG. 19. System diﬀerences in quantum execution time. We ob-
serve signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the quantum execution time between
diﬀerent systems. This example shows the average quantum execu-
tion time observed when running the QFT(1) benchmark on Rigetti
Aspen-9 (upper plot) and IBM Q Casablanca (lower plot). Note the
diﬀerent minimum execution times and the diﬀerent rates of increase
with circuit width. (Data collected via cloud service.)
erage execution time is shown as a function of the circuit width
(the number of qubits) up to 7 qubits. On IBM Q Casablanca,
the execution time is approximately independent of circuit
width, suggesting a minimal execution time of∼ 7 seconds for
any circuit. The increase in execution time is small as circuit
width and depth increase (although note that this trend should
not be naively extrapolated to larger widths and depths). In
contrast, on Rigetti Aspen-9 the minimum execution time is
about 4 seconds and there is a steep increase in execution time
as circuit width increases (we conjecture that this is because all
gates are serialized on Aspen-9, meaning that gates on distinct
qubits that could be applied in parallel are applied in serial).
We found that there is signiﬁcant variation in the execution
time proﬁle across the many diﬀerent devices that we tested.
VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Quantum computing is an emerging technology, and exist-
ing quantum computers experience a wide range of complex
errors. To understand the capabilities of current and near-term
quantum hardware the research community needs a robust set
of performance benchmarks and metrics. In this work we in-
troduced a suite of quantum application-oriented performance
benchmarks and demonstrated them on a selection of cloud-
accessible quantum computers. Our benchmarking suite is
based on a variety of well-known quantum algorithms, and it
is designed to probe the eﬀectiveness of quantum hardware at
executing applications. Each of our application benchmarks
tests a quantum computer’s performance on variants of that
application’s quantum circuits. They are designed to map out
performance as a function of the input problem’s size. We
measure performance both in terms of result ﬁdelity and the
quantum execution time, providing users with proxies for both
the quality of and the time to solution.
The initial version of our benchmarking suite, reported here,
has a variety of limitations that we have highlighted throughout.
Our intention is that our benchmarking suite will evolve to ad-
dress both these limitations and new benchmarking needs—as
has been the case with successful classical computing bench-
marking suites such as SPEC [ 24, 25]. For this reason, we
expect that the ﬁrst version of our suite of benchmark pro-
grams, that we have presented in this paper, will be enhanced
substantially over time. Indeed, since the initial version of this
paper was released on arXiv there has been broad community
engagement to enhance our benchmarking suite, and we antici-
pate reporting on these expansions and improvements to our
suite in future publications.
One important limitation of some of our benchmarks is that
they require exponentially expensive classical computations to
implement, and they will be infeasible for O(100) qubits. Our
benchmarks that circumvent this problem do so by using only
circuits that can be eﬃciently classically simulated. However,
such benchmarking circuits must be designed with care so
that a quantum computer’s performance on the benchmark is
indicative of its performance on the algorithm on which it is
based when applied to practically useful problems. A general-
purpose solution to this benchmark design problem was re-
cently introduced [ 55] that enables e ﬃciently measurement
of the process ﬁdelity of any algorithmic circuit. Integrating
this technique with our algorithmic benchmarks would ensure
that all our benchmarks are scalable and robust, making them
practical to run on hundreds or thousands of qubits. Integrat-
ing this technique [ 55] and related methods [ 8, 56] into our
benchmarking suite is a promising avenue for future research.
Another limitation of our benchmarking suite is that our
measurements of execution time are currently rudimentary. We
primarily quantify compute time in terms of the time required
to execute each quantum circuit. This is rudimentary because
the deﬁnition of this time can vary by provider, and it neglects
the classical co-processing inherent in quantum applications
(e.g., circuit compilation time) that must be quantiﬁed for
an accurate measure of the total compute time. We suggest
that further research is required into how to delineate and
consistently measure each aspect of total compute time.
Our primary method for summarizing a quantum computer’s
result quality on our benchmarks is volumetric benchmarking
[8, 23] plots, which display performance as a function of the
problem input size (circuit width) and the quantum computa-
tion’s length (circuit depth). This framework enables transpar-
ent comparisons between applications, as well as comparisons
to other performance metrics. In this work we compared per-
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 21 =====

21
formance on our benchmarks to predictions extrapolated from
the quantum volume [ 10] metric. Our experimental results
demonstrate that, on the tested devices, the quantum volume
is broadly predictive of application performance. However,
the reliability of extrapolating the quantum volume to predict
application performance varies between devices. A more quan-
titative and comprehensive comparison between performance
on application-oriented benchmarks and application-agnostic
benchmarks (e.g., the quantum volume benchmark [10] or mir-
ror circuit benchmarks [8]) would constitute interesting future
work.
The performance of the hardware that we tested suggests
that substantial advances are required for quantum computers
to outperform their classical counterparts on useful tasks. For
example, our volumetric plots clearly communicate that an im-
provement in the quantum volume from, e.g. 32 to 2048, will
not make it possible to successfully execute Shor’s algorithms
on useful problem instances—which, as is well-known, will al-
most certainly require large-scale quantum computers running
fault tolerant quantum error correction. However, the potential
for advances in algorithms, in quantum computing hardware,
and in the software stack mean that quantum advantage on
some problem might be achievable in the near-term. As new
algorithms are developed they can be added to our suite, and
our benchmarks can quantify the performance gains provide
by technological advances. Therefore, our suite is well-suited
to tracking progress towards useful quantum advantage.
Cloud-accessible quantum computers are attracting a wide
audience of potential users, but the challenges in understanding
their capabilities is a signiﬁcant barrier to adoption of quan-
tum computing. Our benchmarking suite makes it easy for
new users to quickly assess a machine’s ability to implement
applications, and our volumetric visualization of the results is
designed to be simple and intuitive. We therefore anticipate
that our benchmarking suite will encourage adoption of quan-
tum computing, and further economic development within the
industry.
DATA AND CODE A V AILABILITY
The code for the benchmark suite introduced in this work
is available at https://github.com/SRI-International/QC-App-
Oriented-Benchmarks. Detailed instructions are provided
in the repository. The source code for quantum volume
and volumetric benchmarking are contained in their respec-
tive public repositories [ 57, 58]. All data and code re-
quired to reproduce all plots shown herein are available at
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6972744.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We acknowledge the use of IBM Quantum services for
this work. The views expressed are those of the authors,
and do not reﬂect the o ﬃcial policy or position of IBM or
the IBM Quantum team. IBM Quantum. https: //quantum-
computing.ibm.com/, 2021. We acknowledge IonQ for the con-
tribution of results from hardware not yet generally available.
We acknowledge Quantinuum for contributing the results from
their commercial H1.1 hardware. Timothy Proctor’s contribu-
tion to this work was supported in part by the U.S. Department
of Energy, Oﬃce of Science, O ﬃce of Advanced Scientiﬁc
Computing Research through the Quantum Testbed Program.
Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-program laboratory
managed and operated by National Technology and Engineer-
ing Solutions of Sandia, LLC., a wholly owned subsidiary of
Honeywell International, Inc., for the U.S. Department of En-
ergy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract
DE-NA-0003525. Publisher acknowledges the U.S. Govern-
ment license to provide public access under the DOE Public
Access Plan (https://www.energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-
access-plan). All statements of fact, opinion or conclusions
contained herein are those of the authors and should not be
construed as representing the oﬃcial views or policies of the
U.S. Department of Energy, or the U.S. Government.
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 22 =====

22
Appendix A: Selected Algorithms and Applications
In this appendix we examine the quantum programs that
we selected for use as benchmarks, and describe how we
turned those programs into benchmarks. Complete details
for every benchmark can be found at https://github.com/SRI-
International/QC-App-Oriented-Benchmarks. In this appendix,
all of numerical results presented are based on execution of the
application circuits on a noisy simulator with a speciﬁc noise
model. The noise model consists of one- and two-qubit depo-
larizing errors with error rates of 0.003 and 0.03, respectively.
1. Shallow Oracle-Based Algorithms
The ﬁrst group of quantum programs that we converted into
benchmarks consist of three ‘oracle’ algorithms.
• Deutsch-Jozsa Algorithm [59]
• Bernstein-Vazirani Algorithm [13, 60, 61]
• Hidden Shift Problem [13, 61, 62]
All of these algorithms share a simple structure in which
the primary qubits of the circuit are initialized into a quantum
superposition and a ‘secret’ integer value is embedded into
the circuit using a special ‘oracle’ operation. The oracle uses
quantum gates to manipulate the relative phases of the qubits
to eﬀectively ‘hide’ the integer, encoded as a string of ones and
zeros, in the resulting quantum state. At the end of the circuit,
the quantum state is transformed back into the computational
basis and the secret integer value is revealed.
FIG. 20. An example of a circuit that implements the Bernstein-
Vazirani algorithm, with illustrative Bloch spheres that denote the
states of the qubits throughout the circuit.
Figure 20 shows a circuit diagram for the Bernstein-Vazirani
algorithm (BV) on 5 qubits, one of which is used as an ancilla
or accessory qubit. An example of an oracle circuit U f encod-
ing the integer value 13 (bit string ‘1101’) is shown in Figure
21. Each ‘1’ bit is encoded using a controlled NOT gate on the
5th ancilla qubit.
To illustrate how these circuits work, we have inserted small
Bloch sphere icons into the main circuit diagram before and
after the oracle and again before the measurements. The oracle
operates on the uniform superposition generated by Hadamard
gates on the ﬁrst 4 qubits to encode the secret integer into a
FIG. 21. An example of the circuit that implements the Bernstein-
Vazirani Oracle function U f . This example encodes the integer 13.
quantum state. Each qubit that performs a CNOT operation will
experience phase kickback that rotates the phase of its quantum
state by π/2. The ﬁnal set of Hadamard gates transforms the
qubits back into the computational basis and the value encoded
in the oracle is revealed upon measurement.
The main circuit of the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm (DJ) is
identical to the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm, but it uses a
slightly more complex oracle that encodes either a ‘constant’ or
‘balanced’ function. The oracle is very similar to the Bernstein-
Vazirani—it also uses a sequence of CNOT gates—so it is not
shown here.
FIG. 22. Examples of circuits that implement the oracle functions for
the Hidden Shift algorithm: U f (left) and Ug (right).
The Hidden Shift algorithm (HS) applies two oracle func-
tions in a row, which contrasts with the DJ and BV algorithms.
The ﬁrst application of the oracle is identical to the second
application, except that it includes a hidden ‘shift’—a secret
integer that encodes a diﬀerence between the values returned
from the two oracles (shown in Figure 22). The two oracles
together result in a circuit depth for the HS that is nearly double
that of the BV and DJ algorithms. Due to the similarities be-
tween these algorithms, we group them together as the ‘tutorial’
category.
To construct benchmarks out of each of these algorithms,
each circuit of a speciﬁc width is executed multiple times with
a random integer encoded in the oracle. Figure 23 shows the
results obtained from executing these 3 benchmarks on the
noisy simulator, for between 2 and 12 qubits.
2. Quantum Fourier Transform
The QFT [63] and its inverse are used extensively as compo-
nents of many well-known quantum applications, e.g., Shor’s
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 23 =====

23
1 2 3 4 7 10 17 27 43 69110176281450721 1K 2K 3K 5K 8K12K
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
QV=32
Bernstein-Vazirani (1)
Deutsch-Jozsa
Hidden Shift
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator  2022-10-16 04:38:24 UTC
FIG. 23. Results from running the three oracle algorithm benchmarks
on a simulator.
algorithm. We constructed two benchmarks based on the QFT.
The ﬁrst of these benchmarks, which we refer to as the QFT(1)
benchmark, is shown in Figure 24 and is as follows. The n
qubits are initialized to encode a random integer x (x = 13
in the example shown in Figure 24). This is followed by the
standard QFT circuit, which encodes the input integer value
into the Fourier basis, through a series of Hadamard gates and
controlled Z rotations. Then a set of simple rotation gates
are applied that add 1 modulo 2n, in the Fourier basis, to the
input state. This is then followed by the standard circuit for
implementing the inverse QFT, which converts the Fourier ba-
sis state back into the computational basis, and then all the
qubits are measured. The resulting bit string should be the x+1
modulo 2n (in the example of Figure 24, 14, rather than the
initial value of 13). This benchmark can be thought of as a
type of Loschmidt echo, or a simple form of mirror circuit [8],
in which the QFT is undone by the inverse QFT that follows it.
The inclusion of the +1 operation in the middle of the circuit
prevents a transpiler from easily compiling this circuit down to
an identity (although note that this current implementation is
does not strictly prevent compilation down a simpler operation).
Additionally, it adds sensitivity to errors that would be can-
celed by a perfect Loschmidt echo (a forwards and backwards
evolution experiment) but that do impact the performance of
the QFT. Note, however, that a randomly selected operation in
the center of the circuit is required to guarantee sensitivity to
all errors [8]—and this benchmark will likely be updated in
the future to include this random operation.
The QFT sub-circuit used in the QFT(1) benchmark is dis-
played in Figure 25. The inverse QFT sub-circuit is not shown
as it is a mirror image of the QFT circuit (with gates replaced
with their inverses, meaning that the rotation angles are negated
and the Hadmard gates are unchanged). Note that this QFT
implementation does not use SWAP gates (so it e ﬀectively
FIG. 24. An example of the circuits used in the QFT(1) benchmark.
FIG. 25. The standard circuit that implements the n = 4 qubit QFT.
The standard n-qubit QFT circuit is used in the ﬁrst of our QFT-based
benchmarks.
reverses the order of the qubits) which simpliﬁes its use in the
benchmark programs.
Our second QFT benchmark [QFT(2)] executes only a stan-
dard circuit for the inverse QFT. In the QFT(2) benchmark,
the inverse QFT operates on a quantum state that is prepared
in a Fourier basis state. In this method, instead of creating
that quantum state using the QFT (which converts any com-
putational basis state into a Fourier basis state), we use a set
of one-qubit gates—speciﬁcally, a series of Hadamard gates
and Z rotations, to encode a speciﬁc integer value x in the
Fourier basis. Figure 26 demonstrates this circuit, for the case
of encoding the integer value 6. The inverse QFT reverses
that operation, so if there are no errors the measurement result
should be the bit string encoding x.
FIG. 26. An example of the circuits used in the QFT(2) benchmark.
The circuits of the QFT(2) benchmark are similar to the
second half of circuits of the QFT(1) benchmark, so the circuit
depth in QFT(2) is approximately half that in QFT(1) (for
ﬁxed n). A useful consequence of this is that the benchmarks
can be used to cross-validate each other: if both benchmarks
are a good quantiﬁcation of a quantum computer’s performance
on the QFT and its inverse, and the QFT and its inverse have
approximately the same error, then the result ﬁdelity from
QFT(1) will be approximately the square of the result ﬁdelity
from QFT(2).
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 24 =====

24
1 2 3 5 9 15 26 44 77132227390670 1K 2K 3K 6K10K17K30K51K
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
QV=32
Quantum Fourier Transform (2)
Quantum Fourier Transform (1)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator  2022-10-16 04:38:27 UTC
FIG. 27. Results from running the two QFT-based benchmarks on a
simulator.
Figure 27 shows the results obtained from executing the
QFT(1) and QFT(2) benchmarks. We see the expected rela-
tionship between the ﬁdelities of the two benchmarks (note
that this simple relationship can be proven to hold for simple
depolarizing errors like those used in this simulation).
3. Grover’s Search Algorithm
Grover’s algorithm [64], also referred to as the quantum
search algorithm, is one of the most well known quantum al-
gorithms due to its quadratic run-time speedup over the best
known classical algorithm. This algorithm aims to ﬁnd the
correct item from an un-ordered list. It achieves a quantum
speedup by starting in a uniform superposition and using re-
peated calls to a quantum oracle to amplify the probability of
measuring the correct state. The ampliﬁcation used in Grover’s
algorithm was then generalized into amplitude ampliﬁcation
[65], which is used in the Amplitude Estimation and Monte
Carlo algorithms.
Our benchmark based on Grover’s Search algorithm is de-
signed so that the oracle marks a given bit string with a phase
of−1. At each circuit width, multiple circuits are constructed
by generating random bit strings of length equal to the width
of the circuit. Figure 28 shows the results of executing the
Grover’s Search benchmark on a simulator. This volumet-
ric plot highlights the fast increase in circuit depth with increas-
ing circuit width for this algorithm—which causes a rapid drop
in the result ﬁdelity as the circuit width grows. This occurs
because Grover’s algorithm for n-qubits uses many n-qubit
Toﬀoli gates. These gates need to be decomposed into one-
and two-qubit primitive gates, which substantially increases
the depth. Note that shallower decompositions of n-qubit Tof-
foli gates are possible using ancilla qubits, which we do not do
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12Circuit Width
QV=32
Grover's Search
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator  2022-10-16 04:38:29 UTC
FIG. 28. Results from running the Grover’s Search Benchmark
on a simulator.
here.
4. Phase and Amplitude Estimation
Quantum Phase Estimation [66] is another important quan-
tum subroutine that is fundamental to many quantum algo-
rithms, including Shor’s algorithm [67]. The goal of the al-
gorithm is to estimate the eigenvalues of a unitary operator
by calculating the corresponding phases. A generalization of
phase estimation is amplitude estimation [65], where the goal
is to estimate the amplitudes of a quantum state. Due to the
importance of phase estimation and amplitude estimation as
subroutines for more complicated quantum algorithms, bench-
marking based on these routines will provide insight into the
capabilities of a quantum computer.
The Phase Estimation benchmark is based on picking a
unitary whose phase is to be measured. We choose a phase gate
with eigenvalues exp(±iθ), where θ is deﬁned to a precision
2−k, where k is the number of qubits in the register that stores
the measured phase. The benchmark selects random values
forθ of the form n
2k , where k represents the total number of
measured qubits and n is an integer between 0 and 2k− 1.
The Amplitude Estimation benchmark contains two
quantum subroutines: quantum circuits that implement quan-
tum amplitude ampliﬁcation and quantum phase estimation.
The quantum amplitude ampliﬁcation is used to encode the
amplitudes of a target quantum state into a phase which can be
extracted using phase estimation. This benchmark performs
the simplest case of quantum amplitude estimation where, sim-
ilar to phase estimation, we chose speciﬁc circuits such that the
amplitudes are speciﬁed to a precision which can be exactly
encoded in the available qubits.
Figure 29 shows the results obtained when executing our
Phase Estimation and Amplitude Estimation bench-
marks. Note the depth of the Phase Estimation bench-
mark’s circuits scale similarly to the depth of the circuits in the
two QFT-based benchmarks. This is because the QFT is the
subroutine of phase estimation that uses the deepest circuits.
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 25 =====

25
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
QV=32
Phase Estimation
Amplitude Estimation
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator  2022-10-16 04:38:31 UTC
FIG. 29. Results from running the Phase Estimation and
Amplitude Estimation benchmarks on a simulator.
The Amplitude Estimation benchmark, on the other hand,
involves deeper circuits due to the quantum amplitude ampli-
ﬁcation protocol. This ﬁgure shows that a quantum computer
with a quantum volume of 32 is incapable of high ﬁdelity im-
plementations of the Amplitude Estimation algorithm (at least
when implemented in its standard form), even for tiny problem
instances.
5. Hamiltonian Simulation
One of the most promising applications for quantum comput-
ers is in the simulation of quantum systems [68]. Many simula-
tion problem require simulating the evolution of a Hamiltonian,
so we designed a benchmark based on Hamiltonian evolution.
The Hamiltonian we choose is the anti-ferromagnetic Heisen-
berg chain of 1-D spins with disordered x- and z-ﬁelds and an
open boundary condition:
H = J
n−2∑
i=0
⃗σi·⃗σi+1 + w
n−1∑
i=0
(hx,iσx
i + hz,iσz
i ), (A1)
where J and w are the strength of the interactions and the disor-
dered ﬁelds respectively, hx,i and hz,i give the strength of the X
and Z disordered ﬁelds at site i, n is the total number of qubits,
andσ{x,y,z} are the usual Pauli operators. In this benchmark,
J = 1, w = 10, and hx,i and hz,i are randomly generated in the
range (−1, 1). The algorithm initializes the qubits in a product
state and evolves them according to a Trotterized version of
the Hamiltonian [69]. The Trotterization implements the term
exp(−iJ⃗σi·⃗σi+1) exactly using a construction from Vatan and
Williams [70]. We use a ﬁxed number of Trotter steps.
Figure 30 shows the results of running the Hamiltonian
Simulation benchmark on a simulator. Note that the depth
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
QV=32
Hamiltonian Simulation
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator  2022-10-16 04:38:33 UTC
FIG. 30. Results from running the Hamiltonian Simulation
benchmark on a simulator.
of the circuits does not increase with increasing width, due to
the form of the Hamiltonian that we choose. This benchmark
uses exponentially scaling classical computations, as the error-
free circuit output is computed using a general-purpose circuit
simulation.
One way to construct a Hamiltonian simulation benchmark
that does not require expoentially expensive classical compu-
tations is to use a phenomenon called many-body localization
[71, 72], where evolution under a random Hamiltonian such
as the one in Eq. A1 preserves certain quantities. However,
long evolution times are required for many body localization,
resulting in circuits containing thousands of circuit layers. A
benchmark based on this method would therefore arguably not
be useful for current hardware.
6. Monte Carlo Sampling
Classical Monte Carlo algorithms use random processes to
solve problems numerically where other methods might be
infeasible. A quantum algorithm which has a quadratic speed
up over classical Monte Carlo algorithms was proposed by
Woerner and Egger [73], which we have used here as the ba-
sis for our Monte Carlo Sampling benchmark. The Monte
Carlo sampling algorithm aims to compute the expected value
of some function f (X), where X is a random variable that p(X)
distributed. The algorithms uses two oracles. One of these
oracles,R, is deﬁned by
R|0⟩n|0⟩ =
∑
i
√
p(X = i)|i⟩n|0⟩. (A2)
This encodes the probability distribution p(X) into the ampli-
tudes of n qubit states. The other oracle,F , is deﬁned by
F|i⟩n|0⟩ =|i⟩n
(√
1− f (i)|0⟩ +
√
f (i)|1⟩
)
. (A3)
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 26 =====

26
1 2 6 14 33 80191459 1K 3K 6K15K36K88K210K505K1M 3M 7M17M40M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12Circuit Width
QV=32
Monte Carlo Sampling (2)Monte Carlo Sampling (1)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator  2022-10-16 04:38:34 UTC
FIG. 31. Results from running the two benchmarks based on the
Monte Carlo Sampling algorithm on a simulator.
This encodes the function value f (i) into the amplitude of a
single auxiliary qubit. By applyingR andF on a n + 1 qubit
system initialized to the zero state, we obtain
FR|0⟩n|0⟩ =∑
i
|i⟩n
(√
p(X = i)
√
1− f (i)|0⟩ +
√
p(X = i)
√
f (i)|1⟩
)
.
(A4)
Recall that for the amplitude estimation, given the operatorA,
A|0⟩n+1 =
√
1− a|ψ0⟩| 0⟩ +√a|ψ1⟩| 1⟩, (A5)
the amplitude estimation algorithm yields a. The Monte Carlo
Sampling algorithm works by applying
A =FR (A6)
and then perform amplitude estimation on the resultant state to
produce
a =
∑
i
p(X = i) f (i) = E[ f (X)], (A7)
which is the expectation value of the f function.
We implemented two benchmarks based on running the
Monte Carlo Sampling algorithm for diﬀerent choices of f and
p. Monto Carlo Samping(1) enables the user to choose f
and p. For general distributions and functions, the circuits of
this benchmark are very deep. Monto Carlo Samping(2)
ﬁxes p to the uniform distribution (thisR oracle can then be
implemented using only Hadamard gates), and the ﬁxes f to
the parity function [ f (i) = 1 if i has an odd number of 1’s in
its binary expansions and f (i) = 0 otherwise], which means
that theF oracle can be implement using only CNOT gates.
Figure 31 shows results from both versions of our benchmark.
7. Variational Quantum Eigensolver
Solving the electronic structure problem is one of the most
promising applications for quantum computers, with potential
contributions to drug discovery [74], developing new materials
and catalysts for more eﬃcient light-harvesting and CO2 reduc-
tion [75], understanding high-temperature super conductivity
[74], and other important use cases [76]. In the NISQ era, one
of the most promising approaches is the variational quantum
eigensolver (VQE) [51, 52].
The VQE algorithm implements a parameterized circuit for
a chosen wavefunction ansatz. It then measures the energy ex-
pectation value of the wave function and optimizes the circuit
parameters towards a direction that lowers the energy expec-
tation value. The VQE algorithm is based on the variational
principle [77],
E =
⣨
Ψ(⃗θ)
⏐⏐⏐H
⏐⏐⏐Ψ(⃗θ)
⟩
⣨
Ψ(⃗θ)
⏐⏐⏐Ψ(⃗θ)
⟩ ≥ E0, (A8)
in which the energy expectation value of an parameterized
wave function Ψ(⃗θ) is lower bounded by the exact ground state
energy E0. In other words, the optimal parameter⃗θ∗ that mini-
mizes the energy expectation value corresponds to the closest
description to the exact ground state within the ﬂexibility of the
wave function ansatz. Herein, H is the electronic Hamiltonian
deﬁned as
H =
∑
pq
hpqa†
paq + 1
2
∑
pqrs
gpqrsa†
pa†
qasar, (A9)
in which hpq, gpqrs are the one- and two-electron integrals, and
a, a† are the Fermionic annihilation and creation operators.
An important aspect of the VQE algorithm is the choice
of the wave function ansatz. Many choices exist, and for our
VQE-based benchmark we choose to use the unitary Coupled
Cluster with singles and doubles ansatz (unitary-CCSD). This
ansatz is deﬁned by [78]
|Ψ⟩ = eT−T†
|Φ⟩ (A10)
where T is the cluster operator and|Φ⟩ is the reference state,
which is chosen to be the Hartree-Fock (HF) state. The cluster
operator is deﬁned by
T =
∑
i,a
ta
i aia†
a +
∑
i> j,a>b
tab
i j aia†
aa ja†
b (A11)
in which i, j indicate molecular orbitals that are occupied in
the HF state, and a, b indicate molecular orbitals that are empty
in the HF state. ta
j and tab
i j are the wave function parameters
associated with single and double excitations.
The unitary CCSD ansatz is a variant of the widely used
traditional CCSD ansatz. Unlike the traditional CCSD ansatz,
which fails to model strongly correlated systems, the unitary
CCSD ansatz has been shown to produce highly accurate re-
sults in both weakly and strongly correlated systems. However,
there is no known classical method that can evaluate the energy
expectation value of the unitary CCSD ansatz with polynomial
cost. In contrast, its unitary nature means that it is natural to
implement on a quantum computer.
Both the electronic Hamiltonian and the unitary CCSD
ansatz are deﬁned with Fermionic operators. In order to imple-
ment them on a quantum computer, one needs to ﬁrst transform
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 27 =====

27
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12Circuit Width
QV=32
VQE Simulation (1)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator  2022-10-15 20:23:06 UTC
FIG. 32. Results from running VQE(1), one of our two VQE-based
benchmarks, on a simulator.
them to Pauli operators. Our VQE benchmarks use the Jordan-
Wigner transformation [79]:
a†
p→ I⊗p−1⊗ [1
2(σx
p− iσy
p)]⊗σz⊗N−p,
ap→ I⊗p−1⊗ [1
2(σx
p + iσy
p)]⊗σz⊗N−p,
(A12)
where I, X, Y and Z are Pauli matrices andN is the total number
of qubits. Upon the Jordan-Wigner transformation, both the
Hamiltonian and the cluster operator becomes a weighted sum
of Pauli words
H(T) =
M∑
i
gi(ti)Pi, (A13)
where Pi is a tensor product of Pauli matrices,
Pi ={I,σ x,σ y,σ z}⊗N. (A14)
The VQE algorithm proceeds by iteratively evaluating and
optimizing the energy by varying the wave function parameters,
until the minimum is found.
The full VQE algorithm includes both a quantum and a clas-
sical part. The former is used to implement the ansatz and mea-
sure the energy, and the latter is applied to optimize the ansatz
parameters. Our initial VQE-based benchmark, VQE(1), only
implements the quantum part of the algorithm. For VQE(1),
we randomly sample the wave function parameters and choose
a ﬁxed measurement basis (varying the measurement basis is
generally necessary to measure the expectation value of the
Hamiltonian H(T)).
In our benchmarks, the Hamiltonian and the wave function
is implemented for the NaH molecule with a bond length of
1.9 Angstrom with the STO-6G basis[ 77]. By changing the
number of orbitals to simulate, we vary the number of qubits.
The smallest case is n = 4 qubits, which corresponds to 2
electrons and 4 spin orbitals. Figure 32 shows the results of
executing VQE(1) on a quantum simulator up to 10 qubits.
8. Shor’s Order Finding
Shor’s factoring algorithm [ 67] is one of the most well-
known applications of quantum computing. Shor’s factoring
algorithm includes both a quantum and classical subroutine.
The quantum subroutine ﬁnds the smallest integer period, or the
order, of a periodic function while the classical subroutine uses
this order to determine the factors of a number in polynomial
time. This process may need to be repeated multiple times,
in case an invalid order is generated. Since the order ﬁnding
routine is the bottleneck of integer factorization, our focus is
on benchmarking the quantum subroutine of order ﬁnding.
The algorithm is designed for ﬁnding the order of functions
that take the form f (x) = ax mod N where a< N. The order
r of this function is the r satisfying ar mod N = 1. If r is
known, a classical computer can compute the prime factors
of N in polynomial time. Our benchmarks based on Shor’s
order ﬁnding algorithm generate random values of r and N
from which a corresponding base value a can be analytically
calculated. The quantum algorithm for order ﬁnding is actually
a variation of quantum phase estimation where the chosen uni-
tary operator performs modular exponentiation. This modular
exponentiation encodes the order in the phases of a quantum
state.
We constructed two benchmarks based on Shor’s order
ﬁnding algorithm, Shor’s Order Finding(1) and Shor’s
Order Finding(2) , based on variants of Shor’s algorithm
introduced by Stephane Bearuegard [ 80]. Shor’s Order
Finding(1) is based on the standard formulation of Shor’s
algorithm, and it requires 4n + 2 qubits where n is the problem
instance size (meaning that N is an n bit integer). Shor’s
Order Finding(2) uses a version of Shor’s algorithm that
utilizes mid-circuit measurements to reduce the number of
qubits. This method uses 2n + 3 qubits. Figure 33 shows
the results obtained executing both these benchmarks on a
1 2 5 11 23 52113249549 1K 3K 6K13K28K62K137K301K662K1M 3M 7M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17Circuit Width
QV=32
Shor's Order Finding (1)
Shor's Order Finding (2)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator  2022-10-16 04:38:37 UTC
FIG. 33. Shor’s Order Finding Algorithms
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 28 =====

28
simulator.
Appendix B: Limitations of the Average Result Fidelity
In this appendix we illustrate some of the limitations inherent
to using the average result ﬁdelity to quantify performance,
using an example. This example illustrates the limitations of
both ﬁdelity and of averaging this ﬁdelity over multiple circuits.
We use the Deutsch-Jozsa benchmark are our example. The
Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm is an n + 1 qubit oracle algorithm that
computes whether f :{0, 1}n→{ 0, 1} is a balanced or constant
function using a single call to an oracle that implements f .
If the function is constant the ﬁrst n qubits should all return
0, and otherwise at least one of the qubits should return 1.
In our benchmark we randomly choose the oracle: with 50%
probability f is a balanced function, and with 50% probability
f is constant. The balanced function that we use is the parity
function, in which case all the qubits should return 1. Now
consider two quantum computers, QA and QB, that always
return the bit strings 0000... and 1000... , respectively. In
both cases, if we run the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm we always
get the correct algorithm output for one of the two inputs, and
the incorrect output for the other, i.e., arguably QA and QB
perform equally badly on this algorithm. But we ﬁnd that
¯Fs = 0.5 for QA and ¯Fs = 0 for QB, where ¯Fs is Fs averaged
over the balanced and constant oracle. This is because for QB,
Fs(Poutput, Pideal) = 0 for both inputs (as Pideal(111... ) = 1 for
the balanced function) [81].
This example illustrates two points. First, the ﬁdelity be-
tween Pideal and Poutput for a particular algorithm input does not
directly correspond to the probability of obtaining the correct
result on that input. In this example, QB always returns the
correct algorithm result on the balanced function input, even
though Fs(Pideal, Poutput) = 0. To avoid this e ﬀect we would
need an algorithm-speciﬁc metric for result quality. We sug-
gest that the result ﬁdelity should be complemented (but not
replaced) with such metrics. Second, quantifying performance
using only an average over problem instances can obscure
important performance information. We suggest that it will
be important to also study, e.g., worst-case performance over
problem instances.
Similar eﬀects to those discussed above were apparent in
our experiments. Figure 34 shows the results of running the
Deutsch-Jozsa benchmark on (a) a quantum simulator with
depolarizing errors, and (b) IBM Q Guadalupe. In the simula-
tion we observe that the average result ﬁdelity decays towards
zero as the number of qubits increases (note that our normal-
ized result ﬁdelity F is designed so that it decays towards zero
in the presence of depolarizing errors, unlike Fs). In contrast,
the average result ﬁdelity for IBM Q Guadalupe decays quickly
to∼ 0.5 with increased circuit width, and then decays slowly.
The constant oracle uses a shallow O(1) depth circuit contain-
ing no two-qubit gates, and its correct result is 000... . In
contrast, the balanced oracle uses O(n) two-qubit gates and
its correct result is 111... . The constant oracle can therefore
be expected to perform much better than the balanced oracle
on IBM Q Guadalupe, which has high-ﬁdelity one-qubit gates
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
Benchmark Results - Deutsch-Jozsa - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator  2021-09-22 23:36:11 UTC
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
Benchmark Results - Deutsch-Jozsa - Qiskit
Device=ibmq_guadalupe  2021-09-22 22:38:46 UTC
FIG. 34. Demonstrating the limitations of average result ﬁdelity
using an example. Results from running the Deutsch-Jozsa bench-
mark on a simulator (upper plot) with depolarizing errors and IBM Q
Guadalupe (lower plot). Unlike in the simulation, the average result
ﬁdelity on IBM Q Guadalupe decays quickly to∼ 0.5 with increasing
circuit width but then decays slowly. This suggests a strong asymme-
try in the result ﬁdelities for the two problem instances—the balanced
and unbalanced function oracles—and, as discussed in the main text,
this asymmetry is consistent with known noise mechanisms in IBM
Q Guadalupe.
[28] and which (like all superconducting systems) experiences
substantial T1 decay that adds a bias towards returning the
000... bit string. This strong asymmetry in the performance
on the constant and balanced oracles would explain the results
of Fig. 34, and it illustrates that average result ﬁdelities must
be interpreted and compared with care.
Appendix C: Issues with Diﬀerent Quantum Computing APIs
Quantum applications are being implemented using a vari-
ety of APIs, e.g., Qiskit, Cirq, Braket, and Q#. These APIs
have many features in common, and our benchmark suite was
initially designed to execute consistently across these multiple
quantum programming environments. However, certain con-
straints exist that make it challenging to accomplish complete
consistency across all APIs.
As a consequence of these diﬀerences, all of the benchmarks
have been implemented using the Qiskit API. Some, but not
all, have been implemented using the Cirq and Braket APIs.
Throughout, all executions of our benchmarking suite on a
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 29 =====

29
quantum simulator are performed using the Qiskit implemen-
tation of our benchmarking suite, as it provides rich circuit
analysis features. Execution on all of the hardware was also
performed using the Qiskit version of our benchmarks, with the
exception of the experiments on Rigetti Computing’s hardware,
which used the Braket version of our benchmarks.
Our benchmarking circuits are deﬁned in a high-level and
algorithm-speciﬁc gate set, and then transpiled (1) to a stan-
dard gate set that we use to deﬁne each circuit’s ‘depth’ [see
Section III F], and (2) to the native operations of a particu-
lar quantum computer in order to run the circuits. There are
two challenges to consistently implementing this methodol-
ogy across di ﬀerent APIs. Firstly, the permitted gates dif-
fer between APIs. For example, in the Amazon Braket API,
there is not direct support for controlled subcircuits which are
used in our deﬁnitions of the Monte Carlo Sampling and
Amplitude Estimation benchmarks. These benchmarks are
therefore not currently available in the Braket implementation
of our suite. Second, we deﬁne a standarized notion of cir-
cuit depth by compiling to a standard gate set. However, the
depth of the resultant circuit will depend on the performance
of the compilation algorithm, which will be API dependent.
The majority of our experiments to date have used the Qiskit
API, limiting cross-API comparisons. An API-independent
deﬁnition of circuit depth will likely be necessary to enable
consistent result comparisons across diﬀerent APIs.
In addition to issues related to circuit compiling, a variety of
other API issues exist that make it challenging to consistently
implement our benchmarking suite and to gather all of the data
of interest. These issues include a requirement in Cirq to in-
clude topology information in the circuit deﬁnition, the limited
availability of the transpiled circuit and detailed metrics of the
execution time in Braket and Cirq, and minor issues relating
to circuit visualizations. For our work, the Qiskit platform
provided the best overall set of features for implementing this
suite of benchmarks and generating the analysis described in
this manuscript.
Appendix D: Advances in Quantum Computers
Developing a suite of performance benchmarks early in a
technology’s development establishes markers with which to
measure advances in both hardware components and support-
ing software. In order to provide this beneﬁt over multiple
product cycles, they must be designed to anticipate advances
in technology that may emerge in the next ﬁve years. Factoring
such advances into benchmarks from the beginning helps to
ensure that future comparisons are meaningful.
We considered speciﬁc enhancements that have been widely
discussed within the quantum computing community, and we
reviewed how these would impact the code structure of the
application benchmark programs. Examples include new hard-
ware features such as mid-circuit measurement, parameterized
gate operations, and tighter integration of classical / quantum
computation. Some of these advances are available now on
a limited set of quantum computers. With input from the
community as well as the providers of quantum computing
hardware, the suite can evolve to eﬀectively gauge the impact
of performance improvements that result from these continuing
advances.
1. Mid-Circuit Measurements
In the ﬁrst quantum computers introduced by commercial
providers, classical measurement of qubit state was permitted
only at the end of the circuit and qubits were not reusable.
Recently, IBM [82, 83], Quantinuum [42, 84] and others have
introduced ways to perform measurement at any stage of the
quantum circuit. The measurements are recorded, qubits are
reset to an initial state, and additional computation can be
performed while qubit coherence is maintained by the quantum
hardware. The measurements collected during execution may
be retrieved by the user with an API call.
This feature provides an option for constructing algorithms
with a smaller number of qubits. Ref. Nation and Johnson [82]
describe an implementation of a Bernstein-Vazirani circuit on
IBM hardware using only 2 qubits to encode a 12-bit secret
string. The ﬁdelity in the measurement result is signiﬁcantly
greater than the equivalent 13-qubit circuit due to the use of
only two qubits. Figure 35 shows a smaller version of that
circuit that is equivalent to a 5-qubit implementation.
Our benchmark suite has some initial benchmarks that can
test, and take advantage of, mid-circuit measurements. The cur-
rent benchmarks that use mid-circuit measurement do so to im-
plement algorithms using a smaller number of qubits. That rep-
resents the same problem as a circuit implemented with a larger
number of qubits (a ‘qubit-equivalent’ problem size). In the
Bernstein-Vazirani(1) benchmark, a sweep is performed
over a progressively larger number of qubits, encoding a larger
secret integer each time. In the Bernstein-Vazirani(2) the
same sweep over problem input size is implemented using only
two-qubit circuits. In this case, the depth of the circuit grows
instead of the width.
Similarly, Shor’s Order Finding(2) benchmark imple-
ments Shor’s order ﬁnding algorithm using a single qubit quan-
tum phase estimation circuit, implemented with mid-circuit
measurement. The eﬀect of the mid-circuit measurement on
Shor’s algorithm can be seen in the reduction in circuit width,
and in the ﬁdelity of the results, in Figure 33.
FIG. 35. A quantum circuit on 2 qubits that uses mid-circuit
measurements to eﬃciently implement the Bernstein-Vazirani algo-
rithm. This circuit implements the same computation as the stan-
dard Bernstein-Vazirani circuit on 5 qubits. This is the basis for the
Bernstein-Vazirani(2) benchmark.
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 30 =====

30
2. Circuit Parameterization
Some quantum algorithms are highly iterative, e.g., the VQE
algorithm or the quantum approximate optimization algorithm
(QAOA). These algorithms introduce an additional iteration
layer that involves modifying the circuit before executing an-
other round of shots. The circuit is typically changed only by
modifying the rotation angles (parameters) on the gates in the
circuit before executing it again. An example of this is the
parameterized ansatz circuit in the VQE algorithm, an example
of which is shown in Figure 36 taken from [11].
FIG. 36. An example of a parameterized quantum circuit, containing
a single parameter (θ), from a small instance of the VQE algorithm
using the UCC ansatz.
Modiﬁcation of rotation angles prior to execution can be
done by creating the circuit from scratch in a high-level lan-
guage (e.g. Qiskit), followed by compilation for the backend
target. The time taken to create, compile, and re-load the circuit
for execution can be signiﬁcant—on the order of a few seconds
to minutes for larger circuits. For an algorithm that requires
hundreds or thousands of iterations, this circuit preparation
time dramatically impacts the total execution time.
The Qiskit and Cirq programming APIs both support a form
of parameter deﬁnition within circuits using Python sympy
objects that improves performance by reducing compilation,
but still requires reloading of the circuit. It is possible that
future advances in quantum computer control systems will
reduce the latency between parameterized executions so that it
is negligible, which would oﬀer the optimal execution time for
such applications.
The VQE-based benchmarks include the execution of a pa-
rameterized circuit. The ansatz circuit is executed repeatedly
but with diﬀerent angles applied to its gates. This is imple-
mented by creating, compiling, and executing the circuit each
time as a new circuit. Currently, the benchmarking suite cannot
take advantage of any parameterized circuit representations
and execution. In a future work, the benchmarks could be
enhanced with the addition of a method to deﬁne the ansatz as
a parameterized circuit.
3. Multiply-Controlled Gates
Several of the benchmark circuits are deﬁned using multiply-
controlled gate operations. This is a type of gate in which
the operation applied to the target qubit is controlled by more
than just a single qubit. The many-qubit To ﬀoli gate is used
in the deﬁnition of many of the benchmarks. None of to-
day’s hardware is able to implement these operations natively.
Any multiply-controlled gate needs to be transpiled into many
smaller primitive gate operations. Figure 37 shows the decom-
position of a standard To ﬀoli gate (an 3-qubit Toﬀoli gate)
which has two control qubits.
FIG. 37. The standard decomposition of the standard Toﬀoli gate into
CNOT gates..
Some of our benchmarks use n-qubit Toﬀoli gates with n
proportional to the circuit width. The transpiled depth of an n-
qubit Toﬀoli gate increases quickly with n. Thus the transpiled
circuits grow in depth very rapidly as circuit width increases.
This is readily seen in the volumetric positioning proﬁle for
the Grover’s Search benchmark in Figure 28.
It is possible that hardware advances will lead to native
implementations of some multiply-controlled gates (although
note that n-qubit controlled gates for arbitrary n cannot be
implemented in constant time). For example, Bækkegaard
et al. [85] have described a possible native implementation of
a Toﬀoli gate as a CCZ gate. If multiply-controlled gates are
implemented natively, benchmarks that are deﬁned using them
will quantify the performance improvement that they provide.
4. Close Classical /Quantum Integration
Increased attention is being given to the total execution
time of quantum applications [ 47, 50]. Quantum computers
are increasingly able to execute complex applications that in-
clude multiple iterations of quantum circuits as subroutines
interleaved with classical computation. The total time taken
by the application to arrive at a solution, aggregated over all
stages of the execution, can be hours or even days. Architec-
tural improvements in the implementation of the hardware and
ﬁrmware of the quantum computer can result in signiﬁcant
reduction in these execution times.
In a recent IBM blog post, Johnson and Faro [47] report on
enhancements to their quantum computing architecture that
results in a reduction in the ‘time to solution’ for a speciﬁc
chemistry problem, from several days to nine hours. This
is signiﬁcant in that it represents a focus on the evolutionary
reduction in the time taken to compute a solution, and not solely
on the relative asymptotic scaling time of quantum computing
as compared to classical. This trend is likely to continue, as
evidenced by current research into quantum accelerators [48]
and other architectural optimizations [49, 50].
Karalekas et al. [86] described a quantum-classical-cloud
architecture that supports a tight coupling between execution
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 31 =====

31
of the classical and quantum parts of a hybrid algorithm with
adjacent hardware, to enable faster execution of such programs
over the cloud. IBM’s announcement of public availability of
the Qiskit Runtime in IBM Quantum [ 87] is another step in
this direction. In a solution of this type, a user may upload
a quantum program and run it with di ﬀerent inputs and con-
ﬁgurations each time each time it is executed without having
to reload the program. Currently, the benchmarks have not
been structured to take advantage of Qiskit Runtime. Classical
and quantum computation can be integrated even further, by
implementing classical computations alongside the execution
of a quantum circuit, within the coherence time of the qubits
Wehden et al. [88]. For example, Ref. Takita et al. [89] discuss
how such a feature would improve the implementation of a
quantum phase estimation algorithm. Our benchmarking suite
will require updates to fully test tightly integrated classical and
quantum processing.
Precise measurement of the execution times for various
stages of a combined quantum/classical application may have
particular value in gauging the evolution and impact of quan-
tum/classical computing integration. Currently, the benchmark
suite collects and reports on the quantum-speciﬁc execution
time reported by the target system, as well as the circuit cre-
ation, launch and queue times. The iterative nature of the
benchmarks means that the total execution time for any one
benchmark program is a rough indicator for overall total time
to solution for that type of application (factoring out the highly
variable queue times). An analysis of execution times aggre-
gated over multiple executions is not reported systematically
or compared in the current suite.
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 32 =====

32
[1] John Preskill. Quantum computing in the NISQ era and beyond.
Quantum, 2:79, 2018. URL https://quantum-journal.or
g/papers/q-2018-08-06-79/ .
[2] Frank Arute, Kunal Arya, Ryan Babbush, Dave Bacon, Joseph C
Bardin, Rami Barends, Rupak Biswas, Sergio Boixo, Fernando
G S L Brandao, David A Buell, Brian Burkett, Yu Chen, Zi-
jun Chen, Ben Chiaro, Roberto Collins, William Courtney, An-
drew Dunsworth, Edward Farhi, Brooks Foxen, Austin Fowler,
Craig Gidney, Marissa Giustina, Rob Gra ﬀ, Keith Guerin,
Steve Habegger, Matthew P Harrigan, Michael J Hartmann,
Alan Ho, Markus Ho ﬀmann, Trent Huang, Travis S Humble,
Sergei V Isakov, Evan Jeﬀrey, Zhang Jiang, Dvir Kafri, Kostyan-
tyn Kechedzhi, Julian Kelly, Paul V Klimov, Sergey Knysh,
Alexander Korotkov, Fedor Kostritsa, David Landhuis, Mike
Lindmark, Erik Lucero, Dmitry Lyakh, Salvatore Mandrà, Jar-
rod R McClean, Matthew McEwen, Anthony Megrant, Xiao
Mi, Kristel Michielsen, Masoud Mohseni, Josh Mutus, Ofer
Naaman, Matthew Neeley, Charles Neill, Murphy Yuezhen
Niu, Eric Ostby, Andre Petukhov, John C Platt, Chris Quin-
tana, Eleanor G Rie ﬀel, Pedram Roushan, Nicholas C Rubin,
Daniel Sank, Kevin J Satzinger, Vadim Smelyanskiy, Kevin J
Sung, Matthew D Trevithick, Amit Vainsencher, Benjamin Villa-
longa, Theodore White, Z Jamie Yao, Ping Yeh, Adam Zalcman,
Hartmut Neven, and John M Martinis. Quantum supremacy
using a programmable superconducting processor. Nature, 574
(7779):505–510, 2019. ISSN 0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi:
10.1038/s41586-019-1666-5. URL http://dx.doi.org/1
0.1038/s41586-019-1666-5 .
[3] Han-Sen Zhong, Hui Wang, Yu-Hao Deng, Ming-Cheng Chen,
Li-Chao Peng, Yi-Han Luo, Jian Qin, Dian Wu, Xing Ding,
Yi Hu, Peng Hu, Xiao-Yan Yang, Wei-Jun Zhang, Hao Li, Yux-
uan Li, Xiao Jiang, Lin Gan, Guangwen Yang, Lixing You, Zhen
Wang, Li Li, Nai-Le Liu, Chao-Yang Lu, and Jian-Wei Pan.
Quantum computational advantage using photons. Science, 370
(6523):1460–1463, 2020. ISSN 0036-8075, 1095-9203. doi:
10.1126/science.abe8770. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.11
26/science.abe8770.
[4] E. Knill, D. Leibfried, R. Reichle, J. Britton, R. B. Blakestad,
J. D. Jost, C. Langer, R. Ozeri, S. Seidelin, and D. J. Wineland.
Randomized benchmarking of quantum gates. Phys. Rev. A, 77:
012307, Jan 2008. doi:10.1103 /PhysRevA.77.012307. URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.77.012
307.
[5] Easwar Magesan, J. M. Gambetta, and Joseph Emerson. Scal-
able and robust randomized benchmarking of quantum pro-
cesses. Phys. Rev. Lett. , 106:180504, May 2011. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.180504. URL https://link.a
ps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.180504.
[6] Robin Blume-Kohout, John King Gamble, Erik Nielsen, Ken-
neth Rudinger, Jonathan Mizrahi, Kevin Fortier, and Peter
Maunz. Demonstration of qubit operations below a rigorous
fault tolerance threshold with gate set tomography. Nat. Com-
mun., 8:14485, February 2017. doi:10.1038 /ncomms14485.
URL https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms14485.
[7] Daniel C Murphy and Kenneth R Brown. Controlling error
orientation to improve quantum algorithm success rates. Phys.
Rev. A, 99(3):032318, 2019. URL https://journals.aps.o
rg/pra/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevA.99.032318.
[8] Timothy Proctor, Kenneth Rudinger, Kevin Young, Erik Nielsen,
and Robin Blume-Kohout. Measuring the capabilities of quan-
tum computers, 2020.
[9] Sergio Boixo, Sergei V . Isakov, Vadim N. Smelyanskiy,
Ryan Babbush, Nan Ding, Zhang Jiang, Michael J. Bremner,
John M. Martinis, and Hartmut Neven. Characterizing quantum
supremacy in near-term devices. Nature Physics, 14(6):595–600,
Apr 2018. ISSN 1745-2481. doi:10.1038 /s41567-018-0124-x.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41567-018-0124-x .
[10] Andrew W. Cross, Lev S. Bishop, Sarah Sheldon, Paul D. Nation,
and Jay M. Gambetta. Validating quantum computers using
randomized model circuits. Physical Review A , 100(3), Sep
2019. ISSN 2469-9934. doi:10.1103/physreva.100.032328. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.100.032328.
[11] Alexander J. McCaskey, Zachary P. Parks, Jacek Jakowski,
Shirley V . Moore, T. Morris, Travis S. Humble, and Raphael C.
Pooser. Quantum chemistry as a benchmark for near-term quan-
tum computers, 2019.
[12] Kristel Michielsen, Madita Nocon, Dennis Willsch, Feng-
ping Jin, Thomas Lippert, and Hans De Raedt. Bench-
marking gate-based quantum computers. Computer Physics
Communications, 220:44–55, 2017. ISSN 0010-4655. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2017.06.011. URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S001046551
7301935.
[13] K. Wright, K. M. Beck, S. Debnath, J. M. Amini, Y . Nam,
N. Grzesiak, J.-S. Chen, N. C. Pisenti, M. Chmielewski,
C. Collins, and et al. Benchmarking an 11-qubit quantum
computer. Nature Communications, 10(1), Nov 2019. ISSN
2041-1723. doi:10.1038 /s41467-019-13534-2. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-13534-2 .
[14] Daniel Koch, Brett Martin, Saahil Patel, Laura Wessing, and
Paul M. Alsing. Demonstrating nisq era challenges in algorithm
design on ibm’s 20 qubit quantum computer.AIP Advances, 10
(9):095101, Sep 2020. ISSN 2158-3226. doi:10.1063/5.0015526.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/5.0015526.
[15] Daniel Mills, Seyon Sivarajah, Travis L. Scholten, and Ross
Duncan. Application-motivated, holistic benchmarking of a
full quantum computing stack. Quantum, 5:415, Mar 2021.
ISSN 2521-327X. doi:10.22331/q-2021-03-22-415. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.22331/q-2021-03-22-415 .
[16] Michele Amoretti. An E ﬀective Framework for Full-Stack
Benchmarking of Quantum Computers. Quantum Views, 5:
52, April 2021. doi:10.22331/qv-2021-04-26-52. URL https:
//doi.org/10.22331/qv-2021-04-26-52 .
[17] Arjan Cornelissen, Johannes Bausch, and András Gilyén. Scal-
able benchmarks for gate-based quantum computers, 2021.
[18] Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum
Computing. URL https://github.com/SRI-Internation
al/QC-App-Oriented-Benchmarks .
[19] Qiskit Open Source Quantum Development. https://qiskit
.org, 2021. Qiskit website.
[20] Google Cirq Qantum AI.https://quantumai.google/cirq,
2021. Google Cirq website.
[21] Amazon Braket. https://aws.amazon.com/braket , 2021.
Amazon Braket website.
[22] Microsoft Q# and the Quantum Development Kit. https://
azure.microsoft.com/en-us/resources/development-
kit/quantum-computing/, 2021. Microsoft Q# website.
[23] Robin Blume-Kohout and Kevin C. Young. A volumetric frame-
work for quantum computer benchmarks. Quantum, 4:362,
November 2020. ISSN 2521-327X. doi:10.22331 /q-2020-11-
15-362. URL https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2020-11-1
5-362.
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 33 =====

33
[24] Standard Performance Evaluation Corporation. URL https:
//spec.org/. SPEC Benchmark Suite, accessed 2021-05-28.
[25] John L. Hennessy and Patterson. Computer Architecture: a
Quantitative Approach. Morgan Kaufmann, 2019.
[26] Amazon Braket > Devices > IonQ. https://us-west-1.co
nsole.aws.amazon.com/braket/home?region=us-west-
1#/devices/arn:aws:braket:::device/qpu/ionq/ionQ
device, 2021. Amazon Braket website, accessed 2021-05-24.
[27] Google Quantum AI Quantum Computer Datasheet. https:
//quantumai.google/hardware/datasheet/weber.pdf ,
2021. Weber datasheet, accessed 2021-05-24.
[28] IBM Quantum. https://quantum-computing.ibm.com ,
2021. accessed 2021-05-15.
[29] Mohan Sarovar, Timothy Proctor, Kenneth Rudinger, Kevin
Young, Erik Nielsen, and Robin Blume-Kohout. Detecting
crosstalk errors in quantum information processors. Quantum,
4:321, 2020. URL https://quantum-journal.org/pape
rs/q-2020-09-11-321/ .
[30] Jay M Gambetta, AD Córcoles, Seth T Merkel, Blake R John-
son, John A Smolin, Jerry M Chow, Colm A Ryan, Chad Rigetti,
S Poletto, Thomas A Ohki, et al. Characterization of addressabil-
ity by simultaneous randomized benchmarking. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
109(24):240504, 2012. URL https://journals.aps.org/p
rl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.240504.
[31] Patty Lee. Quantum V olume: The Power of Quantum Computers.
https://www.honeywell.com , 2020. Chief Scientist for
Honeywell Quantum Solutions. Retrieved 2021-05-25.
[32] Scott Aaronson. Turn down the quantum volume, Mar 2020.
URL https://www.scottaaronson.com/blog/?p=4649.
[33] Note1. In the quantum volume protocol, success is quantiﬁed in
terms of the heavy output probability (HOP) rather than result
ﬁdelity. The success threshold used for the HOP in the quantum
volume protocol is 2/3, which approximately corresponds to a
threshold for result ﬁdelity of 1/2.
[34] Colin P. Williams.Quantum Gates, pages 51–122. Springer Lon-
don, London, 2011. ISBN 978-1-84628-887-6. doi:10.1007/978-
1-84628-887-6_2. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-
84628-887-6_2.
[35] Michael A Nielsen and Isaac Chuang. Quantum computation
and quantum information, 2002.
[36] Ernst Hellinger. Neue begründung der theorie quadratischer
formen von unendlichvielen veränderlichen. Journal für die
reine und angewandte Mathematik, 1909(136):210–271, 1909.
[37] Note2. In all experiments Nshots = 1000, except the VQE(1)
experiments where Nshots = 4098 due to a coding oversight.
[38] Amazon Braket > Devices > Rigetti. https://us-west-1.co
nsole.aws.amazon.com/braket/home?region=us-west-
1#/devices/arn:aws:braket:::device/qpu/rigetti/A
spen-9, 2021. Amazon Braket website, accessed 2021-08-18.
[39] Achieving quantum volume 128 on the honeywell quantum
computer, Sep 2020. URL https://www.honeywell.com/
us/en/news/2020/09/achieving-quantum-volume-128-
on-the-honeywell-quantum-computer .
[40] J. M. Pino, J. M. Dreiling, C. Figgatt, J. P. Gaebler, S. A.
Moses, M. S. Allman, C. H. Baldwin, M. Foss-Feig, D. Hayes,
K. Mayer, and et al. Demonstration of the trapped-ion quan-
tum ccd computer architecture, Apr 2021. URL https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41586-021-03318-4 .
[41] Honeywell. Honeywell sets new record for quantum computing
performance, 2021. URL https://www.honeywell.com/us
/en/news/2021/03/honeywell-sets-new-record-for
-quantum-computing-performance .
[42] J. P. Gaebler, C. H. Baldwin, S. A. Moses, J. M. Dreiling, C. Fig-
gatt, M. Foss-Feig, D. Hayes, and J. M. Pino. Suppression
of mid-circuit measurement crosstalk errors with micromotion,
2021.
[43] Honeywell. Honeywell sets another record for quantum comput-
ing performance, 2021. URL https://www.honeywell.com/
us/en/news/2021/07/honeywell-sets-another-reco
rd-for-quantum-computing-performance .
[44] IonQ Quantum Cloud. https://console.cloud.google
.com/marketplace/product/ionq-public/ionq?pli=1 ,
2021. Amazon Braket website, accessed 2021-08-18.
[45] Elton Yechao Zhu, Sonika Johri, Dave Bacon, Mert Esencan,
Jungsang Kim, Mark Muir, Nikhil Murgai, Jason Nguyen, Neal
Pisenti, Adam Schouela, Ksenia Sosnova, and Ken Wright. Gen-
erative quantum learning of joint probability distribution func-
tions, 2021.
[46] Timothy Proctor, Stefan Serita, Erik Nielsen, Robin Blume-
Kohout, and Kevin Young. Scalable randomized benchmarking
of quantum computers using mirror circuits. In preparation.
[47] Blake Johnson and Ismael Faro. Ibm quantum delivers 120x
speedup of quantum workloads with qiskit runtime, May 2021.
URL https://research.ibm.com/blog/120x-quantum
-speedup?lnk=ushpv18re2.
[48] K. Bertels, A. Sarkar, T. Hubregtsen., M. Serrao, A. A. Moue-
denne, A. Yadav, A. Krol, and I. Ashraf. Quantum computer
architecture: Towards full-stack quantum accelerators. 2020
Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibi-
tion (DATE), Mar 2020. doi:10.23919/date48585.2020.9116502.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.23919/DATE48585.2020.9
116502.
[49] Matthias Möller and Cornelis Vuik. On the impact of quan-
tum computing technology on future developments in high-
performance scientiﬁc computing. Ethics and Information Tech-
nology, 19(4):253–269, Aug 2017. ISSN 1572-8439. doi:
10.1007/s10676-017-9438-0. URL http://dx.doi.org/1
0.1007/s10676-017-9438-0 .
[50] Yudong Cao and Timothy Hirzel. Quantum acceleration in 2020,
Dec 2020. URL https://www.infoq.com/articles/qua
ntum-acceleration-2020/.
[51] Alberto Peruzzo, Jarrod McClean, Peter Shadbolt, Man-Hong
Yung, Xiao-Qi Zhou, Peter J. Love, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, and
Jeremy L. O’Brien. A variational eigenvalue solver on a photonic
quantum processor. Nature Communications, 5(1):4213, Jul
2014. ISSN 2041-1723. doi:10.1038 /ncomms5213. URL http
s://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms5213.
[52] Jarrod R McClean, Jonathan Romero, Ryan Babbush, and Alán
Aspuru-Guzik. The theory of variational hybrid quantum-
classical algorithms. New Journal of Physics , 18(2):023023,
feb 2016. doi:10.1088 /1367-2630/18/2/023023. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/18/2/023023.
[53] Edward Farhi, Jeﬀrey Goldstone, and Sam Gutmann. A quantum
approximate optimization algorithm, 2014.
[54] Note3. The QFT acting on standard input states can be eﬃciently
simulated on a classical computer using a special-purpose simu-
lation algorithm.
[55] Timothy Proctor, Stefan Seritan, Erik Nielsen, Kenneth
Rudinger, Kevin Young, Robin Blume-Kohout, and Mohan
Sarovar. Establishing trust in quantum computations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.07568, 2022.
[56] Samuele Ferracin, Theodoros Kapourniotis, and Animesh Datta.
Accrediting outputs of noisy intermediate-scale quantum com-
puting devices. New J. Phys., 21(11):113038, 2019. ISSN 1367-
2630. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/ab4fd6. URL https://iopsci
ence.iop.org/article/10.1088/1367-2630/ab4fd6.
[57] The Qiskit Team. Measuring quantum volume, Aug 2021. URL
https://qiskit.org/textbook/ch-quantum-hardware/
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 34 =====

34
measuring-quantum-volume.html.
[58] Sandia Quantum Performance Lab. pyGSTi. https://github
.com/pyGSTio/pyGSTi, 2021. Github repository.
[59] David Deutsch and Richard Jozsa. Rapid solution of problems
by quantum computation. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London. Series A: Mathematical and Physical Sciences , 439
(1907):553–558, 1992. doi:10.1098/rspa.1992.0167. URL http
s://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/10.1098/r
spa.1992.0167.
[60] Ethan Bernstein and Umesh Vazirani. Quantum complexity
theory. SIAM Journal on Computing, 26(5):1411–1473, 1997.
doi:10.1137/S0097539796300921. URL https://doi.org/
10.1137/S0097539796300921.
[61] Norbert M. Linke, Dmitri Maslov, Martin Roetteler, Shantanu
Debnath, Caroline Figgatt, Kevin A. Landsman, Kenneth Wright,
and Christopher Monroe. Experimental comparison of two
quantum computing architectures. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences , 114(13):3305–3310, Mar 2017. ISSN
1091-6490. doi:10.1073 /pnas.1618020114. URL http://dx
.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1618020114.
[62] Martin Rötteler. Quantum algorithms for highly
non-linear Boolean functions , pages 448–457. doi:
10.1137/1.9781611973075.37. URL h t t p s : / / e p u b s .
siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/1.9781611973075.37.
[63] D. Coppersmith. An approximate fourier transform useful in
quantum factoring", ibm research report rc19642 ,; r. cle. 1994.
[64] Lov K. Grover. A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for
database search. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual
ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , STOC ’96, page
212–219, New York, NY , USA, 1996. Association for Comput-
ing Machinery. ISBN 0897917855. doi:10.1145/237814.237866.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/237814.237866.
[65] Gilles Brassard, Peter Høyer, Michele Mosca, and Alain Tapp.
Quantum amplitude ampliﬁcation and estimation. Quantum
Computation and Information, page 53–74, 2002. ISSN 0271-
4132. doi:10.1090/conm/305/05215. URL http://dx.doi.o
rg/10.1090/conm/305/05215.
[66] A. Kitaev. Quantum measurements and the abelian stabilizer
problem. Electron. Colloquium Comput. Complex., 3, 1996.
[67] Peter W. Shor. Polynomial-time algorithms for prime fac-
torization and discrete logarithms on a quantum computer.
SIAM Journal on Computing , 26(5):1484–1509, 1997. doi:
10.1137/S0097539795293172. URL https://doi.org/10.1
137/S0097539795293172.
[68] Richard P. Feynman. Simulating physics with computers. Inter-
national Journal of Theoretical Physics , 21(6):467–488, Jun
1982. ISSN 1572-9575. doi:10.1007 /BF02650179. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02650179.
[69] Masuo Suzuki. Generalized trotter’s formula and systematic
approximants of exponential operators and inner derivations
with applications to many-body problems. Communications in
Mathematical Physics, 51(2):183–190, Jun 1976. ISSN 1432-
0916. doi:10.1007/BF01609348. URL https://doi.org/10
.1007/BF01609348.
[70] Farrokh Vatan and Colin Williams. Optimal quantum circuits
for general two-qubit gates. Phys. Rev. A, 69:032315, Mar 2004.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.69.032315. URL https://link.aps
.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.69.032315.
[71] Andrew M. Childs, Dmitri Maslov, Yunseong Nam, Neil J.
Ross, and Yuan Su. Toward the ﬁrst quantum simulation with
quantum speedup. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 115(38):9456–9461, 2018. ISSN 0027-8424. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1801723115. URL https://www.pnas.org/c
ontent/115/38/9456.
[72] D. Zhu, S. Johri, N. H. Nguyen, C. Huerta Alderete, K. A. Lands-
man, N. M. Linke, C. Monroe, and A. Y . Matsuura. Probing
many-body localization on a noisy quantum computer.Phys. Rev.
A, 103:032606, Mar 2021. doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.103.032606.
URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.
103.032606.
[73] Stefan Woerner and Daniel J. Egger. Quantum risk analysis.
npj Quantum Information, 5(1):15, Feb 2019. ISSN 2056-6387.
doi:10.1038/s41534-019-0130-6. URL https://doi.org/10
.1038/s41534-019-0130-6 .
[74] S. McArdle, S. Endo, A. Aspuru-Guzik, S. C. Benjamin, and
X. Yuan. Quantum computational chemistry. Rev. Mod. Phys.,
92:015003, 2020.
[75] V . V . Burg, G. H. Low, T. Häner, D. S. Steiger, M. Reiher,
M. Roetteler, and M. Troyer. Quantum computing enhanced
computational catalysis. Phys. Rev. Research, 3:033055, 2021.
[76] M. Reiher, N. Wiebe, K. M. Svore, D. Wecker, and M. Troyer.
Elucidating reactions mechanisms on quantum computers. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci., 114(29):7555–7560, 2017.
[77] Attila Szabo and Neil S. Ostlund. Modern Quantum Chemistry:
Introduction to Advanced Electronic Structure Theory. Dover
Publications, Mineola, N.Y ., 1996.
[78] Yudong Cao, Jonathan Romero, Jonathan P. Olson, Matthias
Degroote, Peter D. Johnson, Mária Kieferová, Ian D. Kivlichan,
Tim Menke, Borja Peropadre, Nicolas P. D. Sawaya, and et al.
Quantum chemistry in the age of quantum computing. Chemical
Reviews, 119(19):10856–10915, Aug 2019. ISSN 1520-6890.
doi:10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803. URL http://dx.doi.org
/10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803.
[79] P. Jordan and E. Wigner. Über das paulische äquivalenzverbot.
Zeitschrift für Physik, 47(9):631–651, Sep 1928. ISSN 0044-
3328. doi:10.1007/BF01331938. URL https://doi.org/10
.1007/BF01331938.
[80] Stephane Beauregard. Circuit for shor’s algorithm using 2n+3
qubits. Quantum Info. Comput. , 3(2):175–185, March 2003.
ISSN 1533-7146.
[81] Note4. Here we have used Fs rather than the normalized ﬁdelity
F for simplicity; the result for F diﬀers only by a small n-
dependent factor.
[82] Nation and Johnson. How to measure and reset a qubit in the
middle of a circuit execution, Feb 2021. URL https://www.
ibm.com/blogs/research/2021/02/quantum-mid-cir
cuit-measurement.
[83] Mid-Circuit Measurements Tutorial. https://quantum-comp
uting.ibm.com/lab/docs/iql/manage/systems/midcir
cuit-measurement/, 2021. IBM Quantum Lab.
[84] Samuel Moore. Honeywell’s ion trap quantum computer makes
big leap, Mar 2020. URL https://spectrum.ieee.org/se
archContent?q=quantum%2Bsupremacy.
[85] T. Bækkegaard, L. Kristensen, N. Loft, C. Andersen, David
Petrosyan, and N. Zinner. Realization of eﬃcient quantum gates
with a superconducting qubit-qutrit circuit. Scientiﬁc Reports, 9,
09 2019. doi:10.1038/s41598-019-49657-1.
[86] Peter J Karalekas, Nikolas A Tezak, Eric C Peterson, Colm A
Ryan, Marcus P da Silva, and Robert S Smith. A quantum-
classical cloud platform optimized for variational hybrid algo-
rithms. Quantum Science and Technology, 5(2):024003, Apr
2020. ISSN 2058-9565. doi:10.1088 /2058-9565/ab7559. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/2058-9565/ab7559.
[87] Qiskit Runtime. https://quantum-computing.ibm.com/
lab/docs/iql/runtime/, 2021. IBM Quantum Lab.
[88] Wehden, Gambetta, and Faro. Ibm’s roadmap for building an
open quantum software ecosystem, Feb 2021. URL https:
//www.ibm.com/blogs/research/2021/02/quantum-dev
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023

===== PAGE 35 =====

35
elopment-roadmap.
[89] Takita, Lekuch, and Corcoles. Quantum circuits get a dynamic
upgrade with the help of concurrent classical computation, Feb
2021. URL https://www.ibm.com/blogs/research/202
1/02/quantum-phase-estimation.
Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum Computing January 11, 2023
