===== PAGE 1 =====

Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks
Thomas Lubinski, 1, 2 Carleton Coffrin,3 Catherine McGeoch, 4
Pratik Sathe, 5, 6, 7 Joshua Apanavicius,8, 9 and David E. Bernal Neira 6, 10, 11
(Quantum Economic Development Consortium (QED-C) collaboration) ∗
1Quantum Circuits Inc, 25 Science Park, New Haven, CT 06511
2QED-C Technical Advisory Committee on Standards and Performance Benchmarks
3Advanced Network Science Initiative, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA
4D-Wave Systems, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada, V5G 4M9, Canada
5Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California at Los Angeles, USA
6Research Institute of Advanced Computer Science, Universities Space Research Association, Mountain View, CA, USA
7Theoretical Division (T4), Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA
8Indiana University Department of Physics, Bloomington, Indiana 47405, USA
9Indiana University Quantum Science and Engineering Center, Bloomington, Indiana 47405, USA
10Quantum Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, NASA Ames Research Center, Mountain View, CA, USA
11Davidson School of Chemical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
(Dated: February 5, 2024)
Combinatorial optimization is anticipated to be one of the primary use cases for quantum computation in the
coming years. The Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) and Quantum Annealing (QA)
can potentially demonstrate significant run-time performance benefits over current state-of-the-art solutions.
Inspired by existing methods to characterize classical optimization algorithms, we analyze the solution quality
obtained by solving Max-Cut problems using gate-model quantum devices and a quantum annealing device. This
is used to guide the development of an advanced benchmarking framework for quantum computers designed
to evaluate the trade-off between run-time execution performance and the solution quality for iterative hybrid
quantum-classical applications. The framework generates performance profiles through compelling visualizations
that show performance progression as a function of time for various problem sizes and illustrates algorithm
limitations uncovered by the benchmarking approach. As an illustration, we explore the factors that influence
quantum computing system throughput, using results obtained through execution on various quantum simulators
and quantum hardware systems.
CONTENTS
I. Introduction 2
II. Background 4
A. The MaxCut Optimization Problem 4
B. Quantum Algorithms for Optimization Problems 4
C. Benchmarking Quantum Computers 5
D. Quantum Benchmarks for Optimization Tasks 6
III. QED-C Benchmark Framework Enhancements 7
A. Benchmark Algorithm for QAOA 7
B. Benchmark Algorithm for QA 8
IV . Analysis of Max-Cut Benchmark Metrics 8
A. Application-Specific Result Quality Metrics 8
B. Result Quality and Time of Execution 10
C. Factors A ffecting QAOA Ansatz Fidelity 11
V . Execution on Quantum Hardware 12
∗ This work was sponsored by the Quantum Economic Development Consor-
tium (QED-C) (quantumconsortium.org), managed by SRI International,
and was performed under the auspices of the QED-C Technical Advisory
Committee on Standards and Performance Benchmarks. The authors ac-
knowledge many committee members for their input and feedback on the
project and this manuscript.
A. Ion Trap Systems 13
B. Superconducting Transmon Systems 14
C. Quantum Annealing System 15
D. Discussion of Hardware Results 15
VI. Summary and Conclusions 16
Code Availability 17
Acknowledgement 17
References 19
A. Methods for Combinatorial Optimization 24
1. Combinatorial Optimization Theory 24
B. Quantum Heuristics for Optimization Problems 25
1. Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm 25
2. Quantum Annealing 26
C. Problem and Implementation Details 27
D. Analysis of Execution Time 27
E. Result Quality and Hyper-Parameters 28
1. Initial Angles and Restarts 28
2. Fixed Angle Conjecture 29
3. Parameter Selection Strategy 30
arXiv:2302.02278v2  [quant-ph]  1 Feb 2024

===== PAGE 2 =====

2
I. INTRODUCTION
In many application domains, it is of utmost importance to
efficiently find near-optimal solutions to problems that involve
many variables that affect the cost of some operation or func-
tion. For example, in a large power grid, rapidly determining
the best allocation of power distribution could prevent a major
blackout. These are known as combinatorial optimization prob-
lems and are often cited as a potential use case for quantum
computing [1–3].
Classical computer algorithms for addressing such prob-
lems are substantially advanced and are implemented across
industry, government, and academia. They perform critical
functions in optimizing resource utilization and minimizing
cost. Combinatorial optimization applications are often ex-
ecuted under tight resource constraints (e.g., time, memory,
energy, or money), and there is particular emphasis on quan-
tifying the quality of results that could be obtained within a
limited budget. Standard techniques for measuring and com-
paring the performance of alternative solution methods have
matured and are in widespread use [1]. An illustrative example
of a performance profile is shown in Figure 1.
Quantum computing introduces new techniques for finding
solutions to such combinatorial challenges, such as Quantum
Annealing (QA) [4, 5] and the Quantum Approximate Opti-
mization Algorithm (QAOA) [6] that may demonstrate some
benefit over classical approaches. Theory and classical simula-
tions indicate that, for some problems, QAOA has the potential
to outperform classical algorithms [7, 8], and some empirical
tests of QA systems have demonstrated superior performance
over classical alternatives in limited scenarios [3, 9–11].
Numerous efforts have emerged to characterize the perfor-
mance of quantum computers for applications in optimization
(see section II). However, we find that for such benchmarks to
be accessible to users outside the quantum research community,
they must both incorporate emerging methods for quantum
computing benchmarking and present results meaningfully to
experts in domains such as classical optimization and Opera-
tions Research (OR).
In this paper, we demonstrate how a properly constructed
benchmark program that monitors and characterizes the execu-
tion of a combinatorial optimization application on a quantum
computing system can provide valuable and critical insights
into options for improving its performance and overall through-
put. Additionally, analysis and presentation methodology can
be structured in ways familiar to quantum computing special-
ists but are informed by how Operations Research views the
quality of results from a solver in addressing optimization prob-
lems. These enhanced analysis and visualization techniques
can provide useful information about the throughput a quan-
tum computing solution can offer and the factors that can be
adjusted to improve performance on these systems. While
component and simple application-level benchmarks provide
useful information about general performance characteristics,
the optimization application supplements this with a detailed
understanding of a quantum optimization application’s total
cost of ownership. While these techniques have long been used
in Operations Research, their effective application to quantum
Optimality Gap (%)
Optimization Performance Profiles
Problem Size Small 
Problem Size Medium 
Problem Size Large
Time (seconds)
gap-at-time
time-to-target
0
10
20
30
0 100 200 300 400
FIG. 1: An Illustration of a Performance Profile for Benchmark-
ing Optimization Methods. Performance Profileplots, like the one
shown here, are widely used by the Operations Research commu-
nity to understand, communicate, and compare the performance of
optimization methods. The quality of the solution, as the relative
difference from optimal (optimality gap), can evolve over time during
the execution of an optimization algorithm. This permits the user to
gauge the time required to obtain a solution of a desired quality (time-
to-target) or the solution quality achieved after a specified amount of
time (gap-at-time). The gap-at-time metric is the de facto standard
used in Operations Research, reflecting use cases for most industrial
optimization applications. Performance profiles tend to change with
problem size. It is common for problems with a small number of de-
cision variables to converge to an optimal solution reasonably quickly.
In contrast, with larger problems, achieving solutions above a quality
threshold can be difficult, which is expected due to the NP-HARD
nature of challenging optimization tasks.
computing is still in the early stages.
Concretely, we introduce a methodology and versatile frame-
work for characterizing the performance of combinatorial op-
timization solvers executed on quantum computing systems
based on different underlying technologies. We demonstrate
this framework’s features and highlight its benefits using the
QAOA algorithm for execution on gate model systems. We
also demonstrate its adaptability to other types of solvers by
using QA on annealing hardware. In future work, we plan to
extend this to include other technologies, such as cold atoms.
We demonstrate the capabilities of our framework using the
widely studied Max-Cut [12, 13] problem, in which the goal
is to find the maximum cut size of an undirected graph. The
Max-Cut problem offers a simple early-stage target for evaluat-
ing the effectiveness of quantum computing solutions. These
solutions could also scale to larger applications and incorpo-
rate constraints and other problem features that escalate the
challenge.
The new optimization application benchmark is provided
as an enhancement to the existing open-source QED-C
Application-Oriented Benchmark suite [ 14, 15]. This is a
diverse collection of algorithmic benchmarks for evaluating
the performance of (gate-model) quantum computers on prob-
lems not currently related to optimization, with support for
execution on multiple systems and for collecting, analyzing,
and uniformly presenting performance metrics. Basing our
work on this existing framework enabled us to readily extend it
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 3 =====

3
0
0.250.50.75
1
1.251.51.75
2
2.252.52.75
3
3.253.53.75
4
4.254.54.75
5
Cumulative Elapsed Quantum Execution Time (s)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18Problem Size (# of Variables)
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator  Jan 06, 2023 08:00:46 UTC
shots=1000, rounds=2, degree=3, restarts=1, fixed_angles=False, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Approximation Ratio
(a)
0
0.250.50.75
1
1.251.51.75
2
2.252.52.75
3
3.253.53.75
4
4.254.54.75
5
Cumulative Elapsed Quantum Execution Time (s)
4
8
12
16
20
24
40
80
160
320Problem Size (# of Variables)
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Ocean
Device=advantage_system4.1  Jan 06, 2023 07:15:20 UTC
shots=1000, degree=3, restarts=1, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
Approximation Ratio (b)
4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Problem Size (# of Variables)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60Optimality Gap (%)
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator  Jan 06, 2023 08:00:55 UTC
shots=1000, rounds=2, degree=3, restarts=1, fixed_angles=False, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
Approx. Ratio
CVaR Ratio
Gibbs Objective Function
Best Measurement Ratio
Quartiles (c)
FIG. 2: Characterizing Performance of Quantum Computing Solutions. These new performance profiles depict the trade-o ff between
result quality and execution time for two quantum computing solutions to the unweighted Max-Cut problem: (a) the Quantum Approximate
Optimization Algorithm and (b) Quantum Annealing. Each row shows a different problem size. The X-axis displays the cumulative execution
time, and the rectangle color measures the solution quality defined by the approximation ratio (= 1− opt_gap/100). For QAOA, successive
rectangles depict its iterative execution, tracking the search for appropriate parameters to converge to an optimal solution. For QA, each stacked
rectangle represents a distinct execution at increasing anneal times. Shown in (c) are several measures of algorithm success, variants of the
approximation ratio, plotted over the distribution of final measurements at each problem size.
with new functionality and make it easy to use and accessible
to a broad audience.
The new benchmark exercises multiple components of the in-
tegrated hybrid quantum-classical computer systems on which
quantum optimization applications run and mimics their real-
world use. Combining existing metrics visualization tools with
new techniques specific to optimization problems enables the
deep exploration of algorithm performance across target sys-
tems. To illustrate these analytics features, we present in Fig-
ure 2 several visualizations generated by this new benchmark.
While many prior benchmarking studies use Max-Cut as an
example of an optimization application, our approach provides
a unique level of flexibility, generality, and customization.
We note that the work described in this paper does not in-
clude a full-scale comparison between quantum computing
systems of different types. Nor does it address benchmarking
of classical solutions to optimization problems, as numerous
in-depth studies exist in this area (see section II D). The perfor-
mance results in this paper are intended primarily to illustrate
features and benefits of our benchmarking framework and not
to meet methodological expectations for heuristic performance
studies from Operations Research.
The inclusion of benchmarking in the QA algorithm has
an essential purpose. QA has been extensively studied over
decades, and its performance characteristics on annealing hard-
ware are well understood. Including QA illustrates how our
benchmark framework readily adapts to quantum computing
technologies other than the gate model. We use QA as a proxy
for other solvers that may use quantum technologies in which
a large part of the algorithm is executed within the hardware
of the remote computing service. We demonstrate how the
framework manages the execution of a series of benchmark
problems and collects and analyzes metrics consistently across
different technologies.
Our work has identified many variables that impact how
well a quantum computer will solve an optimization problem.
However, we did not perform an exhaustive study of these, nor
could we tune vendor-specific hardware settings in all cases to
achieve optimal results. As a result, the performance outcomes
presented should not be considered generalizable to other test
scenarios. A full-scale study of all the factors contributing to
quantum performance to tease out the separate contributions
of algorithms and hardware is beyond the scope of this paper.
Our contributions to quantum benchmarking are threefold:
• Developing a methodology for evaluating the perfor-
mance of quantum computers running on heterogeneous
quantum platforms inspired by standard procedures for
assessing classical optimization heuristics.
• Implementing and demonstrating an open-source bench-
marking procedure for optimization applications that
integrates smoothly with the evolving QED-C bench-
marking framework and allows users to implement their
performance studies easily.
• Illustrating the capabilities of this framework and the
types of performance analysis that it can support using a
familiar NP-HARD problem of interest to applications.
As an example, we focus on throughput analysis of the
application executed on several quantum hardware back-
end systems as a factor contributing to the total cost of
using quantum solutions.
We hope this work sheds light on the practical considera-
tions associated with implementing combinatorial optimization
solvers on quantum computing systems and will encourage
and enable others to measure and record progress in devel-
oping quantum algorithms and computing systems. We pro-
pose that the framework could be used to explore many of
the recent innovations in quantum algorithms for optimization
problems [16–24].
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 4 =====

4
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Back-
ground on fundamentals of benchmarking the performance of
quantum computers and their applications is provided in sec-
tion II. Enhancements to the QED-C Application-Oriented
Benchmarks suite are described in section III where we de-
scribe the benchmark algorithms. This is followed by a dis-
cussion on how we analyze and present the metrics collected
by the benchmarks in section IV. Results from execution on
classically implemented quantum simulators validate that re-
sults match expectations and highlight the insights that can be
gleaned from these benchmarks.
In section V, we analyze results obtained from executing
these benchmarks on two-gate model quantum hardware sys-
tems and a quantum annealing processor using the methods
described in the previous section. Several appendices are pro-
vided at the end of the manuscript to provide detailed infor-
mation about quantum solutions to combinatorial optimization
and to highlight factors that impact the quality of the result,
trade-offs in parameter selection, and challenges in scalability
inherent in quantum algorithms.
II. BACKGROUND
The benchmarking framework measures performance char-
acteristics of the two leading quantum heuristics for solving
combinatorial optimization problems: the Quantum Approxi-
mate Optimization Algorithm, which uses a gate-model quan-
tum computer, and Quantum Annealing, which uses an analog
quantum computer.
This paper presents a benchmark of these algorithms in the
context of their application to solving the Max-Cut problem.
This section provides an overview of the problem’s character-
istics and then reviews the quantum solutions we propose to
benchmark. We also offer a quick review of existing method-
ologies for benchmarking and discuss the similarities and dif-
ferences of our approach with them.
A. The MaxCut Optimization Problem
The Max-Cut problem has emerged as a popular bench-
mark for quantum optimization [12, 25–27] for two reasons:
(1) it is among the most challenging combinatorial optimiza-
tion tasks, even to obtain an approximate solution, i.e., APX-
Hard [ 13, 28], (2) as an unconstrained discrete optimiza-
tion task, it has a natural encoding as a Quadratic Uncon-
strained Binary Optimization (QUBO) [ 29, 30] or an Ising
model [5, 31], ideally fitting current quantum optimization
algorithms (QAOA, QA). These problems often arise when
mapping practical applications [32, 33] to computing hardware
and can appear as subroutines in composite algorithms.
The input for a Max-Cut problem is an undirected graph
consisting of nodes or vertices (V) and edges (E). (Each edge
of the graph can be accompanied by a ‘weight’, but we only
consider unweighted 3-regular graphs in this paper.) A cut
is a partition of the graph nodes into two sets. The size of
a cut is defined as the number of graph edges that connect
FIG. 3: The MaxCut Problem. For an undirected graph consisting
of nodes, or vertices, ( V) and edges ( E), partition the vertices into
complementary sets such that the number of edges between the sets
is the greatest. This graph shows one solution to one instance of the
MaxCut problem for a graph with eight nodes, using colored nodes
and edges. Nodes with different colors belong to the two sets of the
solution cut. The number of solid red edges that connect nodes from
different sets is the MaxCut of that graph.
nodes belonging to di fferent sets. The Max-Cut problem is
identifying a cut with the largest size out of all possible cuts.
(Here, we consider the unweighted version of the MaxCut
problem, so that each edge of the graph has the same weight.)
Figure 3 presents a representative 8-node graph in which
each node is connected to others by precisely three edges. This
type of graph is known as 3-regular or of degree 3. Graphs
of degree 3 are considered the most di fficult to solve [ 34].
This figure shows one solution to the Max-Cut problem, using
colored nodes and edges. The number of red edges that connect
the nodes is the maximum cut of the graph.
Due to the challenges associated with finding even approx-
imate solutions to the MaxCut problem at a larger scale (for
both classical and quantum algorithms), a quantity called the
approximation ratio is often computed to characterize the qual-
ity of the solution obtained. For example, in the problem
depicted in Figure 3, the Max-Cut size is 10 (out of 12 total
edges). A naive optimization algorithm that randomly tested
various cuts but ran out of time to test them all might conclude
that the largest cut size was 9. In this case, the approximation
ratio would be a number smaller than 9/10 or 0.90, as it is a
statistical function of the distribution of all solutions found.
It is common to report the quality of a result in terms of its
distance from an optimal solution when benchmarking classical
algorithms for optimization problems. The optimality gap is
related to the approximation ratio by Equation 1.
optimality_gap = (1.0− approximation _ratio)× 100 (1)
Both of these measures of quantum system performance are
relevant in distinct contexts. In our work, we incorporate both
metrics to facilitate discussions on the outcomes attained with
our benchmarking implementation.
B. Quantum Algorithms for Optimization Problems
Quantum annealing and circuit-based quantum computers
solve a combinatorial optimization problem using fundamen-
tally different strategies. To provide context for our work,
we briefly outline how these quantum algorithms function to
find solutions to these problems. Additional detail about these
algorithms is provided in section B.
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 5 =====

5
Optimization problems, such as Max-Cut, can be described
by a Hamiltonian HP that is unique to the problem and rep-
resents its variables and constraints. The optimal problem
solution then corresponds to this Hamiltonian’s ground state(s).
The QAOA and QA algorithms use quantum state evolution
to compute the energy expectation value for HP and identify
values for variables β and γ that yield the lowest energy eigen-
state(s) for
Fβ,γ B⟨β, γ| HP|β, γ⟩. (2)
The quality of solution, or approximation ratio ( AR), can
then be defined as the ratio of the computed energy state Fβ,γ
and the true ground state energy Emin (assuming it is known).
In our case, the Hamiltonian energies are always negative or
zero.
AR = Fβ,γ/Emin (3)
a. Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm
QAOA is arguably the leading candidate for solving combi-
natorial optimization problems using gate-model quantum
processors. QAOA belongs to the class of Variational Quantum
Algorithms (VQA) [35] and is usually implemented iteratively
wherein a classical optimizer ‘trains’ a parameterized quantum
circuit. QAOA is a heuristic that attempts to solve combi-
natorial optimization problems, such as QUBO problems.
Specifically, the problem is encoded in the form of a specified
quadratic function of binary variables, and the objective is
to find an assignment for those variables that minimizes the
function.
At the core of QAOA is an ‘ansatz circuit’, a parameterized
quantum circuit. Measurements in the computational basis at
the end of the circuit correspond to sampling from a probability
distribution over possible answers to the problem. A classical
optimizer is used to obtain parameter values likely to produce
optimal or near-optimal solutions by repeatedly taking circuit
measurements while varying parameter values.
b. Quantum Annealing Quantum annealing effectively
addresses optimization problems by using a versatile approach
to identifying the global minimum of a function using a system-
atic process. The algorithmic approach of QA is inspired by
the adiabatic theorem from quantum mechanics to transform
an easy-to-prepare ground state of an initial Hamiltonian into
the ground state of the ‘target’ Hamiltonian that encodes the
combinatorial optimization problem.
At a high level, the protocol strives to identify the low-energy
states of a user-specifiedHTarget model by conducting an analog
interpolation process of the following Hamiltonian, arriving at
minimum energy states at the end of the evolution:
H(s) = (1− s)HInit + (s)HTarget. (4)
With quantum annealing, convergence to a solution is per-
formed entirely within the quantum system from the user’s
view. The problem is mapped to an initial state (equal super-
position with respect to the problem basis) on the hardware,
and the system is set to anneal towards a solution. Longer
annealing times are associated with higher solution quality.
1 2 4 8 16 32 64128256512 1K 2K 4K 8K16K33K66K131K262K524K1M
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12Circuit Width
QV=32
Hidden Shift
Hamiltonian Simulation
Quantum Fourier Transform (1)Grover's Search
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator  Oct 03, 2022 04:40:11 UTC
FIG. 4: Application-Oriented Benchmarks. Here, we present one
way to illustrate the result fidelity obtained by executing several
application-oriented benchmarks up to 8 qubits on a noisy quantum
computer simulator. The plot shows the average result fidelity as a
function of circuit width and the circuit depth plotted on a volumetric
background to visualize the ‘profile’ and result fidelity of the bench-
mark circuits. (plot produced by QED-C benchmark suite)
C. Benchmarking Quantum Computers
This section reviews concepts and definitions from prior
benchmarking work that we reference throughout this
manuscript. We focus primarily on the application-oriented
level of performance evaluation in our benchmarking of com-
binatorial optimization applications.
a. System-Level Benchmarks A large body of reference
material exists for gate model computing systems on com-
ponent and system-level benchmarks [ 36–42]. We use two
well-known system-level performance benchmarks, Quan-
tum V olume (QV) [43, 44] and V olumetric Benchmarking
(VB) [45, 46] as a backdrop in several of our benchmark plots.
While these two methods characterize quantum circuit exe-
cution quality and scale, neither provides information about
the time it takes a program to run, which is a critical factor in
evaluating the total cost of any computing solution.
Quantum annealing systems have been available for empir-
ical study since 2011 [47–49]. Examples of component- and
system-level approaches to evaluating quantum annealing pro-
cessors may be found in early papers [47, 50, 51] and in recent
proposals for benchmarking of large-scale quantum annealing
hardware [52–54].
b. Application-Level Benchmarks Component and
system-level metrics offer valuable insights into overall system
capability, but predicting the e ffectiveness of a machine
with a certain level of general performance for a specific
application class can be challenging [46, 55]. To address this,
application-focused benchmarks run well-defined programs
tailored to provide application-specific performance metrics.
Due to its relative maturity, benchmarking of QA tends to
involve application-level tests using models with more than
100 qubits, which presents significant challenges for validation
by comparison to the classical simulation of ideal quantum sys-
tems [3, 56–58]. Such benchmarking work often compares the
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 6 =====

6
runtime performance of quantum hardware to that of classical
methods [3, 59–62]. Using synthetic optimization problems, a
problem instance with a known optimal solution is planted [63–
65].
In contrast, early-stage gate model quantum computers re-
quire benchmarks that involve smaller problems and numbers
of qubits. Application-oriented benchmark frameworks typi-
cally create circuits that use well-known quantum gate com-
binations or algorithms, provide inputs and expected outputs,
and execute them on quantum simulators or physical hard-
ware [14, 15, 66–70]. Result quality metrics are computed
using statistical differences between expected and actual mea-
surements or proximity to an application-specific metric de-
rived from the measurements.
Of particular relevance is the first QED-C application-
oriented benchmark suite [ 14, 15], upon which our work is
based. The QED-C suite o ffers a practical methodology to
evaluate the performance of various quantum programs across
a range of quantum hardware and simulator systems. Its bench-
mark programs sweep over a range of problem sizes and input
characteristics while systematically capturing key performance
metrics, such as quality of result, execution run-time, and
quantum gate resources consumed, as shown in Figure 4. Sup-
porting infrastructure and abstractions make these benchmarks
accessible to a broad audience. The framework also provides
the structure to enable benchmarking of iterative algorithms,
such as QAOA, or to execute an algorithm in a single operation,
as in QA.
The QED-C benchmarks compute several important figures
of merit, which we use throughout this manuscript. The quality
of result for individual circuits is given by the “Normalized
Hellinger Fidelity”, a modification of the standard “Hellinger
Fidelity” that scales the metric to account for the uniform
distribution produced by a completely noisy device. Resource
consumption is quantified as the total number of gate layers, or
“Circuit Depth”, which can be “Algorithmic” or “Normalized”
(transpiled to a normal basis). Execution time is captured as
“Elapsed Quantum Execution Time” (wall clock) or “Quantum
Execution Time” (reported by quantum provider service) with
more granularity possible in some systems. These metrics are
defined in detail in our prior work [15].
The framework to capture run-time metrics is fundamental
to our new work in benchmarking algorithms for combinatorial
optimization. Although execution time was included in the
first QED-C benchmarks, benchmarking iterative and hybrid
algorithms can provide a more complete picture of a quantum
computer’s run-time performance. The time required to exe-
cute circuits within a quantum application is an essential metric
of performance [71–74], often cited when comparing quantum
and classical computations. For example, quantum and classi-
cal computing times were central to recent demonstrations of
quantum advantage [75, 76].
D. Quantum Benchmarks for Optimization Tasks
Much background material is available on benchmarking
classical solutions to optimization problems [ 3, 62, 77] and
comparing quantum methods to classical solutions [ 78–80].
This work is often oriented toward improving the performance
of quantum algorithms, separate from the analysis of specific
hardware platforms. With QA and QAOA, this approach gen-
erally involves comparing different implementations or tuning
strategies of the quantum algorithm rather than performing
runtime comparisons against classical algorithms.
Quantum computation based on quantum annealing tech-
niques has been used to address combinatorial optimization
problems for more than a decade [ 3, 9, 11, 62, 80–83]. In
these studies, the primary metrics of interest are expected so-
lution quality and operation counts (i.e., circuit depth), which
are used as approximate runtime measurements. Within this
context, two main threads of execution time analysis have
been used in comparing the performance of the quantum an-
nealing algorithm to classical heuristics. The time-to-solution
(TTS) metric determines the expected wall-clock time required
to solve a problem to optimality [48, 82–85]. In contrast, the
time-to-target (TTT) metric determines the expected wall-clock
time required to solve a problem to a specified target solution
quality [ 3, 9, 56, 80]. The typical approach is to measure how
TTS or TTT changes as a function of problem size for both the
classical and quantum methods (i.e., a scaling advantage) so
that one can forecast at what system sizes the quantum solu-
tion approach is likely to be faster than the classical one. In
this work, we use these concepts to inform our analysis of the
trade-off between the quality of the solution and the time it
takes to execute the quantum algorithm.
Significant challenges exist for benchmarking quantum so-
lutions on real-world hardware, as quantum computer noise
characteristics and runtime overhead introduce additional re-
quirements. Due to the implementation complexity of con-
figuring optimization tasks for benchmarking quantum hard-
ware, several software frameworks have emerged to support
the evaluation of the same (or similar) optimization methods
implemented on different platforms. Benchmark frameworks
such as SupermarQ [67] and QPack Scores [68] include one or
more QAOA applications in their sample benchmarks, while
QUARK [69] considers specific optimization problems arising
in industry. The Q-score metric [ 70] is claimed to apply to
quantum processors in several categories, measuring the size
of the largest graph for which the solver outperforms random
guessing within a fixed time limit. All references present re-
sults that measure solution validity, feasibility, and run-time on
several backend quantum computers, some on both gate model
and quantum annealing devices. We used much of this work
to guide our development of new benchmarks in the QED-C
suite based on combinatorial optimization problems.
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 7 =====

7
III. QED-C BENCHMARK FRAMEWORK
ENHANCEMENTS
In this section, we describe the enhancements to the QED-C
benchmark suite that collect and analyze application-specific
quality and temporal metrics associated with hybrid quantum
applications, e.g., QAOA and QA, where the trade-off between
the quality of solution and utilization of resources (here execu-
tion time) is essential. Our effort has two primary goals: 1) to
integrate and enhance critical concepts from other optimization-
centric benchmark efforts into the QED-C benchmark suite as
a standard feature and 2) to present the results and analysis in
ways recognizable by practitioners in the operations research
field who are already familiar with benchmarking classical
solutions to optimization problems.
This section describes specific features of the framework we
developed for cross-paradigm quantum optimization heuristics
benchmarking. The enhancements to our original benchmark
framework are driven by specific features and challenges of
optimization problems and heuristic performance evaluation,
distinct from the simple test scenarios used in our initial bench-
mark suite. The OR community has developed methodologies
and tools for evaluating computational performance in this con-
text, some of which we have adapted to the quantum scenario.
See Appendix A for a discussion of the theoretical foundations.
Several features distinguish our benchmarking framework
from others. Users can evaluate both execution time and solu-
tion quality in detail and explore the trade-offs (as opposed to
fixing a specific TTS or TTT metric). The platform supports
benchmarking of quantum computing hardware that can run
quantum annealing or gate model algorithms. It also provides
the ability to select problems and inputs of interest beyond
our simple illustrations using Max-Cut inputs. Presentation of
benchmark results is aligned with standard methodologies of
Operations Research and the QED-C framework. As quantum
computers grow in size, the benchmark framework will be able
to support testing on a wide variety of optimization problems.
We focus on its application to a combinatorial optimization
problem to demonstrate the key enhancements, using Max-Cut
as a specific example. Unlike the simple algorithms used in
the initial benchmark suite, where circuit execution fidelity is
the key metric, the enhanced benchmark must derive a solution
quality metric that is application-specific and accounts for the
fact that solutions to optimization problems are often approxi-
mate. Results from its execution on a classically-implemented
circuit-based quantum simulator illustrate how key metrics are
collected and presented.
The QED-C benchmark framework includes shared func-
tions to manage the execution of benchmark algorithms over a
range of problem definitions, collect metrics during execution,
and present results consistently across backend targets. Both
the Max-Cut QAOA and QA benchmark algorithms operate
on a target system backend_id, sweeping over a range of prob-
lem sizes [min_size, max_size], to solve a problem defined by
input args. An inner loop, controlled by the max_restarts
argument, provides the ability to execute the benchmark algo-
rithm multiple times at each problem size.
Algorithm1 Benchmark Algorithm for QAOA
1: target← backend_id
2: initialize_metrics()
3: for size← min_size, max_size do
4: circuit_de f← de f ine_problem(problem, size, args, rounds)
5: for restart _id← 1, max_restarts do
6: cost_ f unction← de f ine_cost_ f unction(problem)
7: circuit, num_params← create_circuit(circuit_de f)
8: cached_circuit← compile_circuit(circuit)
9: params[β, γ]← random(num_params)
10: while minimizer() not done do ▷ minimizing
11: circuit← apply _params(cached_circuit, params)
12: counts← execute(target, circuit, num_shots)
13: energy, quality← cost_ f unction(counts)
14: store_iteration_metrics(quality, timing)
15: params[β, γ]← optimize(params[β, γ, energy])
16: done← True i f lowest (energy) f ound
17: done← True i f iteration _limit_reached()
18: end while
19: compute_and_store_restart _metrics()
20: end for
21: compute_and_store_group_metrics()
22: end for
For each problem size tested, we consider a set of random 3-
regular graphs using the networkx package [86] and determine
the maximum cut size for each using the gurobi package [87].
These are used to generate the quantum circuits for testing and
to determine solution quality after execution respectively.
A key practical difference between the QAOA and QA algo-
rithms lies within the restart loop, where the specific solvers
are applied to the input, and the quality of the solution is eval-
uated over increasing execution times. A gate model device
iterates through a series of quantum circuit executions, testing
parameter values, to find a set that yields a low-energy state.
In contrast, a quantum annealing system gradually attempts
to reach its lowest energy state as a transverse Ising model
undergoing quantum mechanical evolution. Comparing the
evolution of the state over time in these systems requires dif-
ferent data collection and presentation. Below, we detail the
related algorithms used to benchmark these solutions and high-
light differences between them and how they impact the results,
omitting some details for brevity.
A. Benchmark Algorithm for QAOA
The QAOA benchmarking method is defined in Algorithm 1.
Nested within the first and second for loops is the QAOA
algorithm, which defines a cost_function based on the problem
specifics and a gate model quantum circuit that implements the
Hamiltonian associated with the problem and is parameterized
by variables β and γ. The quantum circuit used with QAOA
can be replicated by some number of rounds (often referred to
as p in code).
Starting with a random or fixed set of parameters params
(corresponding to|β, γ⟩ from Equation B1. the quantum circuit
is executed shots times to obtain the measurement counts and
compute a value for the cost function. Classical optimizer code
explores the parameter landscape by varying the set of param-
eters to obtain measurement counts representing the Hamil-
tonian’s lowest energy state, iterating until either the lowest
energy is determined or an iteration limit is reached. A relevant
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 8 =====

8
Algorithm2 Benchmark Algorithm for QA
1: target← backend_id
2: initialize_metrics()
3: for size← min_size, max_size do
4: for restart _id← 1, max_restarts do
5: compute_quality← de f ine_compute_quality(problem)
6: for a_time← min_anneal_time, max_anneal_time do
7: embedding← de f ine_problem(problem, size, args)
8: sampler← create_sampler(target, embedding)
9: samples← sample_ising(sampler, a_time, reads)
10: quality← compute_quality(samples )
11: store_iteration_metrics(quality, timing)
12: end for
13: compute_and_store_restart _metrics()
14: end for
15: compute_and_store_group_metrics()
16: end for
quality metric is calculated and stored along with metrics that
track the quantum and classical timing information. Although
we use random starting parameters for the benchmark, users
may have some information about a reasonable starting point
in practice, which could result in a better or faster solution (see
section E 2).
The results of this algorithm’s execution can be affected by
a number of factors unique to QAOA, such as the number of
shots and rounds, the type of classical optimizer employed,
and, most importantly, the noise level in the target system. The
quality of the results can also be constrained by limiting the
number of iterations the classical optimizer performs. In the
QAOA benchmark, this is a configurable option, but we set
this limit to 30 by default to avoid runaway execution on costly
hardware.
The Max-Cut benchmark can be executed using two differ-
ent methods, enabling the study of these factors independent
of the complete QAOA algorithm. Method (1) executes one
instance of the ansatz circuit for a specific problem using con-
figurable shots and rounds, permitting detailed analysis of these
factors. Method (2) executes the complete QAOA algorithm
and provides the option to specify the classical optimizer, with
COBYLA as the default. Additionally, one of several vari-
ants of the cost function may be selected. These variants are
described below in section IV A.
B. Benchmark Algorithm for QA
The QA benchmarking method is described in Algorithm 2.
The core of the QA benchmark algorithm is within the first
and second for loops. It uses a special metrics collection loop
unique to the QA benchmark.
From the user’s perspective, the convergence to a solution
using a quantum annealer is performed in a single step, entirely
within the quantum system. A Hamiltonian describing the
problem is embedded into the quantum components of the
device and is evolved in time to settle to the lowest energy
state, representing an optimal solution.
In our QA benchmark, the QA algorithm is executed multi-
ple times from the start within this particular collection loop.
The anneal_time is initialized to 1µs and doubled after each
execution until it reaches 256µs (the range of annealing times
is a configurable option in the benchmark.) Each time, the
problem is mapped to an initial state (equal superposition with
respect to the problem basis) on the hardware, and the system
is set to anneal towards a solution. Longer annealing times are
associated with higher solution quality.
Using this approach, we are able to provide a measure of
the time versus quality trade-o ff comparable to the QAOA
benchmark by capturing the quality of the solution obtained at
each value of the annealing time. It is impossible to monitor
the solution’s quality as it evolves within a single execution of
the QA algorithm.
For each of the executions performed in the benchmark, the
algorithm queries (reads) samples the same number of times
as we do shots in QAOA. As with benchmarking QAOA, a
relevant quality metric is calculated after each execution and
stored along with metrics that track the quantum and classical
timing information.
The results of this algorithm’s execution are affected primar-
ily by the number of shots or samples, the annealing time used,
and the noise level in the target execution system. The Max-
Cut benchmark can be executed using two different methods,
enabling the study of these factors independently of the entire
QA algorithm. Method (1) executes at a single, configurable
annealing time for each problem size using configurable shots,
permitting detailed analysis of these factors. Method (2) ex-
ecutes the complete QA described in this section algorithm.
Note that in this case, Method (1) is the same as Method (2),
with the range collapsed to a single value.
IV . ANALYSIS OF MAX-CUT BENCHMARK METRICS
In this section, we discuss our analysis of the data collected
as the benchmarks execute. First, we discuss the application-
specific quality metrics explicitly computed for the Max-Cut
problem, produced in common for both QAOA and QA algo-
rithms. The benchmarking framework generates optimality gap
plots and cut-size distribution plots as practical tools to visual-
ize these additional metrics succinctly. Furthermore, metrics
other than the approximation ratio can also be used to assess
result quality, which we discuss in this section.
We follow this with our visualization of the trade-o ff be-
tween execution time and the quality of the result that can be
obtained. While displaying these data in simple line charts is
typical, we generate informative plots that use color to repre-
sent the quality of execution, horizontal length to represent the
execution time of individual iterations, and vertical/horizontal
position to indicate problem size and the cumulative execution
time. The section ends with our analysis of the effect of shot
count and the number of rounds on the quality of result for the
QAOA implementation of the benchmark.
A. Application-Specific Result Quality Metrics
The QAOA and QA algorithms attempt to converge on a
solution to an optimization problem by finding the lowest en-
ergy state of a Hamiltonian after a sequence of parameter tests
(QAOA) or annealing operations (QA) on a target system. In
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 9 =====

9
4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Problem Size (# of Variables)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40Optimality Gap (%)
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator  Jan 06, 2023 08:00:55 UTC
shots=1000, rounds=2, degree=3, restarts=1, fixed_angles=False, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
Quartiles
FIG. 5: Showing Final Optimality Gap. As the QAOA program
executes, the minimizer finds an optimal solution to the Max-Cut
problem, represented by the approximation ratio computed after the
final iteration. The optimality gap for each problem size is computed
from these values and shown in this bar chart, along with quartile
marks showing the distribution of the final measurement results. In
some cases, the quality of the results could improve with additional
execution time, but we limit the benchmark to 30 iterations to conserve
computing resources.
both cases, the result is an energy value computed as a function
of the distribution of the energy samples obtained at the end of
the execution.
This energy value can be compared against the precomputed
optimal solution (i.e., the lowest energy of the Hamiltonian).
The ratio between the actual and expected energy values, or the
approximation ratio [6, 30, 88], is the metric commonly used
to quantify the quality of the results for the Max-Cut problem,
as discussed in section II A. It is formally defined as follows.
Let M denote the number of shots so that for given values
of (vectors) β, γ, we obtain M cut-sizes, one corresponding
to each of the bit-strings obtained from computational basis
measurements. Let these energies be denoted by E1,..., EM,
arranged in non-decreasing order. Since these energies are
≤ 0,|E1|,..., |EM| are non-negative integers arranged in non-
increasing order. Then, the energy expectation value is approx-
imated by
F≈
PM
i=1 Ei
M . (5)
Normalizing the result of this computation to the range[0, 1]
is convenient. Hence, we define the approximation ratio in
Approximation Ratio r = Fβ,γ
|Emin|, (6)
where Emin < 0 is the actual ground state energy of the problem
Hamiltonian.
Optimization performance studies typically use the comple-
ment of this, the optimality gap. In Figure 5, we show the final
optimality gap computed at the end of the execution of the
benchmark algorithm for each of the problem sizes tested. In
this plot, we include quartile bars, which provide information
on the width of the distribution in addition to the mean. Al-
though these results were produced using the QAOA algorithm
on a classically implemented quantum simulator, the results of
our QA algorithm are also plotted in this fashion.
The approximation ratio is a valuable measure of a quantum
computing system’s ability to solve the Max-Cut problem. The
higher the mean of the cut sizes found in the distribution, the
more likely the algorithm will produce a cut size that is the
maximum. However, we note that the final output of these
quantum algorithms is not the approximation ratio but the best-
measured cut (i.e., the cut corresponding to the largest cut size)
obtained across all iterations of the algorithm.
The best-measured cut is often a poor measure of the quality
of the result because it is numerically unstable, particularly
with smaller numbers of samples. However, it has inspired a
few other objective functions, such as the Conditional Value
at Risk or CVaR [89], and the Gibbs objective function [90].
Both metrics focus on the tail end of the distribution rather
than treating all measurements equally.
To illustrate how these di fferent quality metrics relate to
each other, in Figure 6, we illustrate the distribution of cut
sizes produced from the execution of our benchmark on a
noiseless quantum simulator at a problem size of 16 with 1000
samples taken (shots). The distribution obtained from our
benchmark is shown with a black line. A wide pink line shows
a simulated distribution that would be obtained by executing
the algorithm on a computing system that returns uniformly
random results. A distribution that peaks closer to the right
indicates a higher result quality. In this case, the best-measured
result is shown at 1.0, indicating that the algorithm returned
the expected optimal Max-Cut. The CVar and Gibbs ratios fall
between the approximation and best-measured ratios.
Formally, CVaR [89], for a chosen value of parameterα∈
(0, 1], is defined as
CVaRα(β, γ) = 1
⌈αN⌉
⌈αN⌉X
i=1
Ei, (7)
where⌈.⌉ denotes the ceiling function. CVaR α denotes the
mean value of (the negative of) cut-sizes over the lower α-
tail of the measured energy distribution. The limit α→ 0
corresponds to the ground state energy value (i.e., E1), while
α = 1 corresponds to the energy expectation value Fβ,γ. The
value of the metric depends on the choice ofα. While the value
of this parameter can be configured, we default toα = 0.1 in
all plots and analyses.
Another choice is the Gibbs objective function [90], which
is defined as
fη(β, γ) = ln⟨β, γ| e−ηH|β, γ⟩, (8)
withη> 0, and where H denotes a Hamiltonian whose ground
state is sought. The parameterη determines the relative weights
of the low energy states of H in the expression. The param-
eter η tunes fη between two extreme values (similar to α in
CVaR): fη=0(β, γ) = Fβ,γ, while fη→∞ = Emin, i.e., the lowest
measurable energy of H in the state|β, γ⟩.
We normalize each of these objective functions so that they
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 10 =====

10
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Cut Size
Max Cut Size
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20Fraction of Total Counts
Empirical Distribution of Cut Sizes - MaxCut-(2)
Device=qasm_simulator  Jan 06, 2023 08:01:05 UTC
shots=1000, rounds=2, degree=3, restarts=1, fixed_angles=False, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
Problem Size = 16
Circuit Sampling
Uniform Random Sampling
Approx. Ratio
CVaR Ratio
Best Measurement Ratio
Gibbs Objective Function
FIG. 6: Cut Size Distribution: The quality of the final output of
QAOA can be understood by inspecting the distribution of the cut size
values obtained at the final optimizer iteration. A distribution peaked
closer to the right indicates higher result quality. Also plotted here are
the various metrics (vertical lines) and the distribution corresponding
to a uniform random sampling of bit-strings (pink line).
lie in the range [0, 1] and thus define the following quantities:
CVaRα Ratio = CVaRα
|Emin| ,
Gibbs Ratio = fη
η|Emin|,
Best Measurement Ratio = E1
|Emin|.
(9)
In our benchmarking framework, the objective function may
be set to any of these. The approximation ratio is commonly
used in studies of quantum computing solutions to optimization
problems, and the other ratios appear less often in the literature.
These are measures of the quality of the solution where a value
of 1.0 is optimal.
Our framework also generates ‘detailed optimality gap plots’
(e.g., Figure 7). For each problem size, the empirically ob-
tained distribution of cut sizes is shown using a half-violin plot.
(The plotted distribution is that of the quantity1− Cut Size
Optimal Cut Size,
so it is normalized to be between [0,1]). The four metrics
in Equation 6-9 are shown in terms of their optimality gap, i.e.,
(1− metric_value)∗ 100. This provides a detailed snapshot of
the quality of the result as a function of problem size in terms
of various quality metrics.
B. Result Quality and Time of Execution
In this section, we introduce a new method for visualiz-
ing the relationship between solution quality and execution
run-time in the results from our Max-Cut benchmark. The
methodology is inspired by the typical visualizations used
in Operations Research (e.g., the performance profile in Fig-
ure 1). Still, it is enhanced in ways that yield valuable insights
about execution time unique to hybrid quantum computing
4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Problem Size (# of Variables)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60Optimality Gap (%)
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator  Jan 06, 2023 08:00:55 UTC
shots=1000, rounds=2, degree=3, restarts=1, fixed_angles=False, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
Approx. Ratio
CVaR Ratio
Gibbs Objective Function
Best Measurement Ratio
Quartiles
FIG. 7: Detailed optimality gaps plots. A variety of metrics can be
used to assess the quality of the final distribution of outputs of QAOA.
For each implemented problem size or circuit width (along the X-
axis), we plot the optimality gap (along the Y-axis). The obtained
distributions of optimality gaps are shown as pink half-violin plots.
The optimality gap values regarding the CVaR ratio, approximation
ratio, Gibbs Ratio, and Best Cut ratio are shown as line plots.
algorithms. Some aspects of this approach are especially rele-
vant in the early stages of quantum computing maturity. They
provide critical information about bottlenecks and other drag
factors that impact system throughput more than realized.
Our approach can be applied to both QAOA and QA, al-
though the visuals vary slightly in ways that mirror algorithm
differences. In Figure 8, we illustrate the time versus quality
trade-off for the QAOA algorithm using a novel performance
profile referred to as an ‘area plot’. Similar to the volumetric
plot of Figure 4, it shows the circuit width (problem size) on
the Y-axis and uses the color of rectangles to illustrate a metric
score. In the area plot, the horizontal width of an individual
rectangle represents the execution time for a single ansatz, and
its location along the X-axis indicates the cumulative execution
time, including prior iterations.
A key difference between the QAOA and QA benchmarks is
in evaluating the execution times to be plotted on the X-axis.
With QAOA, the algorithm inherently executes in a series of
iterations, and the execution time accumulates with each, repre-
sented by stacked rectangles. With QA, however, the complete
algorithm is executed in a single step. To evaluate how well
the algorithm performs at different times, the algorithm is exe-
cuted from the start each time with different annealing times.
Figure 2b shows how we visualize the re-initialization with
rectangles that overlap instead of being stacked. More detail
about QA execution can be found in section V C.
In the area plots shown here, we use the approximation ratio
as the default figure of merit to gauge the quality of the result.
The approximation ratio ranges from 0 to 1.0, but for QAOA,
it usually starts above 0.5 and oscillates as the optimizer con-
verges to a solution. Due to the annealing computer’s nature,
the QA’s starting point is often above 0.9. We use a different
color scale for QA to emphasize the fundamental di fference
between the algorithms. However, when running the bench-
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 11 =====

11
0
0.0350.070.1050.140.1750.210.2450.280.3150.350.3850.420.4550.490.5250.560.5950.630.665
0.7
Cumulative Quantum Execution Time (s)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18Problem Size (# of Variables)
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator  Jan 06, 2023 08:00:49 UTC
shots=1000, rounds=2, degree=3, restarts=1, fixed_angles=False, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Approximation Ratio
(a)
0
0.0150.030.0450.060.0750.090.1050.120.1350.150.1650.180.1950.210.2250.240.2550.270.285
0.3
Cumulative Classical Optimization Time (s)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18Problem Size (# of Variables)
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator  Jan 06, 2023 08:00:53 UTC
shots=1000, rounds=2, degree=3, restarts=1, fixed_angles=False, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Approximation Ratio (b)
FIG. 8: Iterative Execution of QAOA Max-Cut Algorithm. In QAOA, a classical minimizer function iteratively executes an ansatz, varies its
parameter values, and computes a cost function to converge to an optimal solution. In (a), each horizontal row represents successive iterations at
each problem size (number of qubits), where the position on the X-axis represents the cumulative quantum execution time, and the color tracks
the approximation ratio of each iteration of the optimizer. In (b), the X-axis represents the cumulative classical execution time (optimizer). Both
of these times contribute to the total elapsed time that a user experiences.
marks, any objective functions in the previous section can be
selected as the figure of merit shown in the plots.
The benchmarking framework collects multiple measures of
execution time. The first plot of Figure 8 shows the cumulative
quantum execution time or the time spent executing the quan-
tum processor. The second plot shows the cumulative classical
execution time, primarily consisting of the time taken by the
optimizer in QAOA or the setup time in QA. In Figure 2a, we
show the cumulative elapsed quantum execution time, which is
the total wall clock time that includes both of these plus other
setup times such as compilation or time to load the program
into the quantum processor. We include a detailed analysis
of these and other essential times related to QAOA and QA
algorithms in Appendix D
The quality vs time visualization we use here, the area plot,
significantly enhances the information presented to users about
executing a hybrid quantum algorithm such as QAOA or QA.
For example, this QAOA and QA evolution analysis can pro-
vide information about the incremental time units consumed
by execution. With some of the newer hybrid systems and the
use of error mitigation, it is extremely valuable to inform the
user of the bottlenecks or anomalies in the execution.
For example, in the plots of Figure 8, the width of several of
the rectangles representing the time of each iteration is not uni-
form. With quantum computing in its early stages of maturity,
the execution pipeline often contains many steps that involve
non-deterministic classical computation, some of which are
unique to quantum computing, such as error mitigation. These
plots effectively convey a measure of the level of unpredictabil-
ity in the execution times that may contribute to throughput
degradation.
Other types of information unique to quantum are also trans-
mitted in these plots. For example, QAOA can require classical
pre-processing, specifically compilation, and transpilation to a
target topology and gate set from an intermediate representa-
tion. In contrast, QA requires embedding the problem graph
onto the device topology before execution. With gate model
computers, intermittent calibration processes can sometimes in-
terrupt program execution and appear as rectangles with larger
widths. In addition, there is often a start-up cost associated
with executing any circuit component of these algorithms.
While we only show a few examples here, the area plots
allow users to view all of these things at a glance and can
assist them in quickly interpreting how execution time impacts
the quality of results and overall throughput of the quantum
algorithm.
C. Factors A ffecting QAOA Ansatz Fidelity
Several factors can impact the results obtained from exe-
cuting the QAOA algorithm. Here, we use Method (1) of the
QAOA benchmark to analyze how the number of shots and
rounds can a ffect a quantum computing system’s ability to
execute the ansatz circuit used in the algorithm.
Each iteration of the QAOA algorithm involves repeatedly
measuring a parameterized circuit, executed with parameter
values|β, γ⟩ determined by a classical optimizer routine. The
algorithm’s success relies on the ability of the quantum subrou-
tine to compute an accurate value of the objective function. If
the measurement probabilities obtained by the quantum subrou-
tine do not match sufficiently well with the probabilities from
the ideal distribution Pideal(s) =|⟨s| β, γ⟩|2, the effectiveness
of the classical optimizer can be negatively affected.
Even in a noiseless simulator, perfect fidelity can be achieved
only within the limit of an infinite number of shots. On quan-
tum hardware, noise and decoherence can exacerbate the drop
in fidelity, as can limited connectivity between qubits. To quan-
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 12 =====

12
4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
Normalized
Hellinger
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (1) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator-s1000-r1  Nov 25, 2022 03:06:43 UTC
shots=1000, rounds=1
4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Circuit Width (Number of Qubits)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Avg Result Fidelity
Normalized
Hellinger
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (1) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator-s5000-r1  Nov 25, 2022 03:06:44 UTC
shots=5000, rounds=1
FIG. 9: Impact of Shots on Fidelity of Ansatz Execution. Here, we
illustrate the difference in fidelity when executing the same Max-Cut
ansatz circuit at circuit widths ranging from 4 to 16 qubits, with 1000
shots and again with 5000 shots, on an ideal quantum simulator. For
each problem size, we use a single graph, which defines an instance
of the Max-Cut problem. The resulting fidelity is greater when using
a larger number of shots.
tify circuit fidelity, we use both the Hellinger fidelity and the
normalized Hellinger fidelity as defined in our initial work on
application-oriented benchmarks [15]. The normalized fidelity
is most useful in our context, recalling that a circuit fidelity of
0 corresponds to a uniformly random probability distribution.
In contrast, a fidelity of 1 corresponds to the ideal distribution.
In Figure 9, the number of measurements per iteration
(which we call the number of ‘shots’) is shown to a ffect the
circuit fidelity significantly. For example, on the noiseless sim-
ulator used here, the normalized circuit fidelity falls below 0.6
at eight qubits with 1000 shots, while it does so at twelve qubits
with 5000 shots. As the circuit’s width increases, the number
of shots required to distinguish between the ideal and random
distributions increases. With the variant of QAOA used here,
larger problems require a larger number of shots to effectively
capture the cut sizes in the resulting larger distributions.
Figure 10 illustrates how circuit fidelity is impacted as one
of the arguments for the QAOA ansatz definition, the number
of rounds (referred to as p in code), is increased from 1 to 8.
Execution fidelity is expected to degrade not only as circuits
become wider (i.e., comprise more qubits) but also deeper
(i.e., have a larger number of gate layers). More rounds result
in deeper circuits. The volumetric plot uses a color scale to
represent the fidelity at each circuit width and depth tested.
In this case, the circuit was executed with 1000 shots on a
quantum simulator with noise characteristics that mimic a
typical quantum computer (one- and two-qubit gate error rates
1 2 3 4 7 10 17 27 43 69110176281450721 1K 2K 3K 5K 8K12K
Circuit Depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19Circuit Width
QV=32
MaxCut (1) (rounds=1)
MaxCut (1) (rounds=2)MaxCut (1) (rounds=4)
MaxCut (1) (rounds=8)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg Result Fidelity
Volumetric Positioning - All Applications (Merged)
Device=qasm_simulator-s1000-rN-n-fa  Nov 25, 2022 17:22:14 UTC
FIG. 10: Volumetric Presentation of Fidelity and Impact of
Rounds. The fidelity metrics obtained for the execution of any quan-
tum circuit are influenced by both the width of the circuit and its
depth or its total number of quantum gate layers. Here, the Max-Cut
ansatz circuit with varying rounds is executed on a noisy quantum
simulator with a quantum volume of 32 (one- and two-qubit gate error
rates 0.003 and 0.03, respectively). The (normalized) result fidelity at
a specific width and depth is represented by the color shown in the
rectangle at that location and degrades with increasing rounds (depth)
or problem size (width).
of 0.003 and 0.03, respectively) and with a quantum volume
equal to 32 (the region shown in the dark rectangle). As the
‘rounds’ parameter grows, the circuit becomes correspondingly
deeper, and the result fidelity degrades as a function of depth.
A consequence is that the theoretical benefit of using a larger
number of rounds is countered by the lower fidelity that results
from executing a deeper circuit with a larger gate count.
V . EXECUTION ON QUANTUM HARDW ARE
This section presents results from executing the Max-Cut
benchmark on several representative quantum hardware sys-
tems based on underlying quantum technologies. Our objec-
tive is to demonstrate the robust capability of the benchmark
framework to accurately capture key performance metrics that
highlight fundamental distinctions between technologies.
This presentation can serve as a valuable resource for
providers of these systems, providing insight into incremental
performance improvements across successive generations of
hardware. It can also equip users with tools to form a com-
prehensive understanding of the trade-offs inherent in utilizing
these emerging technologies. Particular attention is placed on
the analysis of solution quality versus execution run-time.
However, we emphasize that the results in this section should
not be taken as representative of the comparative performance
of these quantum platforms in general. They are designed
for illustrative purposes and are not intended to be a formal
comparison between quantum systems. Furthermore, we use
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 13 =====

13
0
120240360480600720840960 1K 1K 1K 1K 2K 2K 2K 2K 2K 2K 2K 2K
Cumulative Quantum Execution Time (s)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12Problem Size (# of Variables)
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Qiskit
Device=ionq_qpu.aria-1-r2-s1000  Jan 07, 2023 01:09:18 UTC
shots=1000, rounds=2, degree=3, restarts=1, fixed_angles=False, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Approximation Ratio
(a)
4 6 8 10
Problem Size (# of Variables)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60Optimality Gap (%)
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Qiskit
Device=ionq_qpu.aria-1-r2-s1000  Jan 21, 2023 18:27:40 UTC
shots=1000, rounds=2, degree=3, restarts=1, fixed_angles=False, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
Approx. Ratio
CVaR Ratio
Gibbs Objective Function
Best Measurement Ratio
Quartiles (b)
4 6 8 10
Problem Size (# of Variables)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000Execution Time (sec)
370 413
537 568
1951
2168
2431
2817
370 413
537 568
1951
2168
2431
2817
370 413
537 568
1951
2168
2431
2817
Max-Cut Benchmark Quantum Execution Times
1000 shots vs 5000 shots, 30 iterations
Device=ionq_qpu-221006  Jan 07, 2023 01:48:53 UTC UTC
1000 Shots
5000 Shots (c)
FIG. 11: Execution on Ion Trap System. These plots present results from executing the Max-Cut benchmark on the IonQ Aria QPU at
different problem sizes (30 iterations, each with 1000 shots). The area plot (a) shows the approximation ratio improving for each problem size as
the cumulative quantum execution time increases (to around 2400s at ten qubits). The violin plot (b) shows the final optimality gap for each
computed ratio and illustrates how the approximation ratio declines with larger problem sizes (to around 20% at ten qubits). Plot (c) presents
data from a different system, IonQ Harmony, comparing the total quantum execution times, using 1000 shots (568s at ten qubits) and again
using 5000 shots (2817s at ten qubits). This indicates that the cost of executing the Max-Cut algorithm on these systems is nearly proportional to
the number of shots used. (Data collected via cloud service.)
the respective manufacturers’ default software and parameter
settings. Together with the quantum systems, these software
tool sets are developing rapidly; therefore, our conclusions
about quantum system performance represent a snapshot of
progress over time. We hope that users will use the framework
to create more thorough benchmark tests and utilize them to
draw conclusions.
Several critical factors affect benchmark algorithm outcomes
on current quantum computing hardware. Errors from gate
infidelity and decoherence can lead to significant differences
between the obtained measurement distribution and an ideal
system, especially with larger circuits. These errors accumulate
in iterative algorithms like QAOA, reducing the quality of the
results. Noise in Quantum Annealing (QA), such as thermal
energy and control line fluctuations, can disrupt qubit states.
Inefficient mappings or embeddings onto specific hardware
topologies worsen these effects.
Apart from purely quantum computation, the quality of solu-
tions returned by QAOA depends significantly on the quality of
classical computations, such as compilation and optimization
of beta and gamma for each round. Similarly, the quality of
solutions returned by QA depends on the classical operations
of minor embedding and post-processing and the user parame-
ters that control the quantum computation. In this sense, our
benchmark framework should be viewed as a tool to evaluate
the performance of the quantum system performance in combi-
nation with algorithmic choices and parameter settings rather
than the performance of a standalone circuit.
When quantum optimization applications are run on hard-
ware, the quality of the result will degrade compared to a sim-
ulator, as the programs will be negatively impacted by noise.
To illustrate the practical limits to execution on hardware, the
benchmarks are executed on three different classes of quantum
computers: ion trap, superconducting transmon, and quantum
annealing system.
A. Ion Trap Systems
We first show results from executing the Max-Cut bench-
mark on two remotely accessed gate model quantum comput-
ing systems that use ion trap technology. Quantum computers
based on ion traps offer all-to-all connectivity and high fidelity,
but this advantage is offset by longer execution times than with
other technologies.
Figure 11 presents results obtained using the IonQ Aria
QPU, a second-generation ion trap computer, and its first-
generation predecessor, IonQ Harmony. At each problem size,
from 4 qubits to 10 qubits, we executed the benchmark on both
systems with a maximum of 30 iterations using 1000 shots
each.
The first plot (a) uses the area plot of section IV B to il-
lustrate, for each problem size, how the approximation ratio
improves as the cumulative quantum execution time increases
with each iteration (to ~ 2400s at ten qubits on Aria). At larger
problem sizes, the ansatz circuit becomes deeper, which in-
creases the total execution time and lowers the quality. The
degradation in the final result quality is visible in the violin plot
(b), which shows the final optimality gap for each computed
ratio increasing with problem size (to ~ 20% at ten qubits.)
However, note that the best measurement ratio gap is 0%.
Plot (c) of this figure presents data generated using IonQ Har-
mony, on which we executed the Max-Cut benchmark twice,
once using 1000 shots and again using 5000 shots. For all prob-
lem sizes, the increase in the cumulative quantum execution
time is roughly proportional to the rise in the number of shots.
For example, at ten qubits, the time increases from 568 sec-
onds to 2817 seconds, a factor of 4.959. The height difference
between the bars at a specific problem size represents the dif-
ference in time spent executing an additional 4000 shots over
30 iterations since both runs share the same initialization time.
From this, we can compute the execution time per shot. For
example, at six qubits, this is (2168− 413)/(4000∗ 30) or 14.6
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 14 =====

14
0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 57 60
Cumulative Quantum Execution Time (s)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8Problem Size (# of Variables)
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Qiskit
Device=ibm_algiers-1k-res-0-240115  Jan 16, 2024 13:53:07 UTC
shots=1000, rounds=2, degree=3, restarts=1, fixed_angles=False, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Approximation Ratio
(a)
4 6
Problem Size (# of Variables)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60Optimality Gap (%)
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Qiskit
Device=ibm_algiers-1k-res-0-240115  Jan 16, 2024 13:53:10 UTC
shots=1000, rounds=2, degree=3, restarts=1, fixed_angles=False, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
Approx. Ratio
CVaR Ratio
Gibbs Objective Function
Best Measurement Ratio
Quartiles (b)
4 6 8 10
Problem Size (# of Variables)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300Execution Time (sec)
100 108 106
124160 160 148 160
100 108 106
124160 160 148 160
100 108 106
124160 160 148 160
Max-Cut Benchmark Quantum Execution Times
1000 shots vs 5000 shots, 30 iterations
Device=ibmq_guadalupe-221013-p  Jan 07, 2023 01:48:53 UTC UTC
1000 Shots
5000 Shots (c)
FIG. 12: Execution on Superconducting Transmon System. These plots present results from executing the Max-Cut benchmark on the IBM
Quantum ibm_algiers system at different problem sizes (30 iterations, each with 1000 shots). Execution was performed using the Sampler
primitive without error mitigation (resilience level 0). The area plot (a) shows the approximation ratio improving for each problem size as the
cumulative quantum execution time increases (to ~ 33s at six qubits). The violin plot (b) shows the final optimality gap for each computed ratio
and illustrates how the approximation ratio declines with larger problem size (to ~ 25% at six qubits.) Plot (c) presents data from a different
system, IBM Quantum ibm_guadalupe, comparing the total quantum execution times, using 1000 shots (124s at ten qubits) and again using
5000 shots (160s at ten qubits). This indicates that the cost of executing the Max-Cut algorithm on this system is only marginally increased
using more shots. (Data collected via cloud service.)
ms/shot for IonQ Harmony. These results indicate that the total
cost to a user to execute the Max-Cut or similar algorithms on
this class of quantum computers includes not only the financial
cost, which depends on the shot count but also a reduction in
total throughput that is a consequence of the longer execution
times.
We observe that execution times on IonQ Aria are longer
than on IonQ Harmony. For example, at ten qubits, we see ap-
proximately 2400 seconds and 568 seconds approximately, re-
spectively. The Aria device applies an error mitigation scheme
to measurement data to improve results. Still, we did not in-
vestigate the reasons behind the increased execution time and
improvement in quality on Aria.
B. Superconducting Transmon Systems
Here, we present results from executing the Max-Cut bench-
mark on two-gate model quantum computing systems that use
superconducting transmon technology and can be remotely ac-
cessed. These results highlight and quantify the characteristics
of quantum program execution inherent in hardware implemen-
tations built on this technology. Quantum computers based on
superconducting transmons execute more quickly than other
technologies. However, this advantage is offset by reductions
in fidelity that can result from the introduction of swap opera-
tions to compensate for limited connectivity between qubits.
Execution on both of the systems was performed using the
Qiskit Sampler primitive run through the IBM Cloud Qiskit
Runtime service [91]. Error mitigation was turned off by set-
ting the “resilience_level” execution argument to 0. While the
Sampler offers automatic error mitigation, we elected not to en-
able it in our hardware demonstrations. Users are encouraged
to gauge for themselves the impact of selecting this option on
both the quality of the result and the total execution time.
The plots in Figure 12 present results from executing the
Max-Cut benchmark on the IBM Quantum ibm_algiers system
at different problem sizes (30 iterations, each with 1000 shots).
The area plot (a) shows the approximation ratio improving for
each problem size as the cumulative quantum execution time in-
creases with each iteration (to ~33s at six qubits). With deeper
ansatz circuits at larger problem sizes, the total execution time
grows longer, and the result quality declines. However, note
this system’s overall run-time performance. Each iteration of
1000 shots requires ~1s at four qubits and ~1.1s at six qubits.
This results in completing the QAOA execution, limited to 30
iterations, in 30 and 33 seconds, respectively.
The violin plot (b) shows the final optimality gap for each
computed ratio increasing with larger problem size (to ~ 25% at
six qubits.) as the approximation ratio declines. However, the
best measurement ratio gap is 0%, indicating that the algorithm
could identify the maximum cut at both problem sizes.
Plot (c) presents data from the execution of the benchmark
on a different system, IBM Quantum ibm_guadalupe. This
is an earlier generation system with execution times that are
longer than on ibm_algiers. However, we use these results to
illustrate an important aspect of quantum program execution
on superconducting transmon computers. Here, we compare
the total quantum execution times obtained when running the
benchmark using 1000 shots (124s at ten qubits) and again
using 5000 shots (160s at ten qubits). Since both runs perform
similar initialization processing, the height difference between
the bars at each problem size represents the difference in time
required to execute an additional 4000 shots over 30 itera-
tions. This lets us determine the time to execute a shot on this
quantum computing device. For example, at six qubits, the exe-
cution time per shot can be computed as(160−108)/(4000×30)
or 0.43 ms/shot.
These results suggest that using more shots to execute quan-
tum programs only marginally increases the cost of executing
the Max-Cut optimization or similar algorithms on this system.
Users may take advantage of significantly higher throughput
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 15 =====

15
0
0.020.040.060.080.10.120.140.160.180.20.220.240.260.280.30.320.340.360.380.4
Cumulative Quantum Execution Time (s)
4
8
12
16
20
24
40
80
160
320Problem Size (# of Variables)
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Ocean
Device=advantage_system4.1  Jan 06, 2023 07:15:23 UTC
shots=1000, degree=3, restarts=1, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
Approximation Ratio
(a)
4 8 12 16 20 24 40 80 160 320
Problem Size (# of Variables)
0
2
4
6
8Optimality Gap (%)
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Ocean
Device=advantage_system4.1  Jan 06, 2023 07:24:52 UTC
shots=1000, degree=3, restarts=1, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
Approx. Ratio
CVaR Ratio
Gibbs Objective Function
Best Measurement Ratio
Quartiles (b)
FIG. 13: Execution on Quantum Annealing System. These plots present results from executing the Max-Cut benchmark on the D-Wave
advantage_system4.1 quantum annealing system at different problem sizes (each with 1000 shots). The problem is embedded once and executed
over a range of annealing times from 1 ms to 256 ms to evaluate the impact of quantum annealing time on the resulting quality. The area plot (a)
shows the approximation ratio improving for each problem size as the cumulative quantum execution time increases (to ~ 0.31s at 320 variables).
The violin plot (b) shows the final optimality gap for each computed ratio and illustrates how the approximation ratio declines with larger
problem sizes (to ~2% at 320 variables.) (Data collected via cloud service.)
on this class of devices to execute the circuit repeatedly to
search for an optimal result while still achieving a shorter to-
tal execution than with alternative technologies. Additionally,
the ability to execute more shots could be explored to achieve
higher-quality results.
C. Quantum Annealing System
An important focus of our work was to structure the QED-C
benchmark suite to enable the execution of some benchmarks
on back-end systems implemented using quantum technolo-
gies other than gate model quantum circuits. In this section,
we describe the execution of the Max-Cut benchmark on a
D-Wave Advantage system, accessed through LEAP Solver
“advantage_system4.1”, as a way to illustrate the framework’s
support for test orchestration with varying parameters, capture
of relevant performance metrics, and presentation of results
consistently across quantum technologies.
The plots in Figure 13 present results from executing the
Max-Cut benchmark on the D-Wave advantage_system4.1
quantum annealing system at problem sizes ranging from 4
to 320 variables (each executed with 1000 shots). As in the
corresponding gate-model displays, the area plot (a) shows the
approximation ratio improving for each problem size as the
cumulative quantum execution time increases (to ~ 0.31s at
320 variables). Similarly, the violin plot (b) shows the final
optimality gap for each computed ratio, and we see the approx-
imation ratio declining with larger problem sizes (to ~2% at
320 variables.)
However, the QA benchmark implementation (described
in section III B) differs from the QAOA benchmark, affecting
how the results are presented. At each problem size, the QA
algorithm is re-executed from the beginning, doubling the
annealing time in steps from 1 to 128 µs. In the annealing
version of the plot (a), for each problem size, the rectangles
are drawn overlaid to highlight this difference from the QAOA
benchmark algorithm. Each rectangle represents a complete
execution but with a larger anneal time.
In this way, we illustrate the quality vs. time trade-o ff for
quantum annealing in the same way we do for the QAOA
algorithm but unambiguously convey the difference between
the algorithms. The intent is to permit a user to quickly see the
level of quality that can be expected for a specific annealing
time, which is essential to evaluate the overall cost of the
quantum annealing solution.
The total quantum execution time for the annealing algo-
rithm increases only slightly as the problem grows, from
~0.22s at 4 variables. to ~0.32s at 320 variables. This is
because the quantum execution reported in the plot includes
the non-quantum operations of chip programming and readout
in addition to the actual annealing time, which is small relative
to these. This suggests that while increasing the annealing
time of the computation may increase the financial cost, it does
not impact the throughput that can be achieved when using
quantum annealing.
At the problem sizes tested in this benchmark, the approxi-
mation ratios obtained with the QA benchmark are above 0.90
in all cases. Therefore, the QA area plots use a different color
scale to represent the approximation ratio, making the evolu-
tion of the quality visible in this different range of values. Note
also that the QA algorithm benchmark identifies the best cut
size for problems with up to 160 variables.
D. Discussion of Hardware Results
The Max-Cut extension to the QED-C benchmark suite en-
ables user control over problem definition and size, shots,
rounds, restarts, initial angles, and the choice of optimizer
and its parameters. The number of possible combinations of
these settings is large, and we explored a limited subset. In
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 16 =====

16
the hardware tests above, we execute benchmark problems of
different sizes on three distinct classes of quantum computers
and explore how the quality of the solution varies as execution
time increases. In two of the tests, we also varied the number
of shots (1000 and 5000) to gauge the impact of this parameter
on system throughput.
In other tests, using simulations implemented with noise
characteristics of these target systems, we found that setting
the rounds parameter to 2 provides a good balance between
the QAOA algorithm’s effectiveness and the degradation from
noise in longer circuits. Other tests indicated that at the small
scale to the tests run using QAOA on gate model hardware, a
setting of 1000 shots and two rounds o ffers the best default
configuration for executing on quantum hardware to minimize
utilization of hardware resources during benchmarking.
For interested readers, we reference Appendix section E,
in which we discuss more extensive demonstrations executed
to determine how the many different parameters affect result
quality. The results suggest that multiple restarts could im-
prove benchmark results. Importantly, using fixed initial an-
gles combined with multiple restarts could be an effective way
to provide a standard optimization benchmark that does not
require complete QAOA execution to evaluate the e ffective-
ness of a target system, reducing the resources necessary for
benchmarking. Also presented in that section is a parameter-
tuning strategy developed with the help of these benchmarks
to identify the best combination of several of the parameters
for QAOA execution.
In the results presented above, we depict cumulative quan-
tum execution time using area plots to illustrate how the qual-
ity of the result improves as execution progresses. This time,
reported by hardware providers, reflects the quantum proces-
sor (or simulator) usage. It holds significant importance as it
directly impacts the financial cost of utilizing quantum com-
puters, which varies substantially across systems. Our analysis
revealed significant variations in execution throughput across
different classes of quantum computing technology. When
evaluating the utility of a quantum computer, it is essential
to consider both the financial cost and the time required to
complete tasks.
Another critical factor to consider in evaluating the total
cost of a quantum computing solution is other time costs be-
yond execution time in the quantum processing. Preparing the
quantum program for execution involves resources overhead.
This can include compilation time, transpilation to the target
topology and gate set, loading the compiled program, and data
transfer into and out of the quantum system. These overhead
components directly impact the optimization application’s to-
tal throughput, as every execution will include some or all of
them.
These throughput factors can vary widely between vendors,
particularly within the execution environment, and uniquely
between users. For example, pre-compilation of the program
or co-location of the classical and quantum processors can
dramatically impact total throughput. There are also numerous
vendor-specific hardware settings that we did not test that could
potentially improve results.
Furthermore, the QAOA and QA algorithms, tailored to
match their corresponding gate model and annealing-based
hardware paradigms, possess di fferent properties and struc-
tures, significantly impacting computation time and solution
quality. This complexity can obscure the effects of hardware
and system performance. For QAOA, the choice of optimizer
and its parameters can dramatically impact benchmark results.
As stated earlier, the performance results in our study are
intended for illustration purposes only and should not be taken
as representative of relative performance in general. Too many
variables contribute to both the quality of the solution and the
total run time for these results to be viewed as a definitive
characterization of these systems’ performance. For these
reasons, we do not provide an exhaustive analysis of these
factors. A full-scale study of all the factors contributing to
quantum performance to tease out the hardware contribution is
beyond the scope of this paper. Instead, we propose that users
include the total cost of execution, including these additional
overheads, in any of their studies using the benchmark suite
presented here.
It is worth noting that inherent variations can significantly
influence the quality of results in the quantum algorithms em-
ployed in these benchmarks. While our study did not delve into
such variations, our benchmark framework offers a platform to
explore recent advancements in optimization algorithms. For
instance, the framework could be configured to incorporate
innovations such as pre-computing diagonal matrices [16], in-
vestigating the impact of multiple rounds [17, 18], adopting a
multi-angle ansatz [19–22], utilizing an expressive ansatz [23],
or employing a large-scale solver with few qubits [ 24]. As
quantum computing hardware progresses to incorporate fault
tolerance and error correction features, it becomes imperative
to advance algorithms in tandem. Utilizing more focused ver-
sions of the tests illustrated here will be crucial in assessing
the concurrent improvement in performance.
VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
While the current generation of quantum computers may be
limited in computational power, these systems are expected to
rapidly evolve and become capable of performing increasingly
complicated tasks. It is thus critical to this advancement effort
to establish accurate and validated methods for measuring
progress that are readily available to the developers of these
systems and the users who utilize the resource in solving real-
world problems.
To this end, we built on the existing open-source QED-C
Application-Oriented Benchmark suite, enhancing it to sup-
port benchmarking of hybrid quantum-classical solutions to
combinatorial optimization problems, often cited as a use case
for quantum computing. Multiple factors a ffect the ability
of a quantum computer to produce solutions to combinato-
rial optimization problems e ffectively. The algorithms used
to find these solutions provide only an approximate answer,
and the quality of the results is typically a function of the time
available for processing, often under tight constraints. Our
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 17 =====

17
benchmarks are designed to provide a mechanism to evaluate
these and to provide valuable and critical insights into options
for improving its performance and overall throughput.
We demonstrate the features of this framework and highlight
its benefits using the Quantum Approximate Optimization Al-
gorithm algorithm for execution on gate model systems and
demonstrate its adaptability to other types of solvers by us-
ing a Quantum Annealing algorithm executed on an analog
quantum computer system. We demonstrate the capabilities
of our framework using the widely studied Max-Cut problem,
which offers a simple early-stage target for evaluating quan-
tum computing solutions but can scale to larger application
challenges in the future. In future work, we plan to extend
this demonstration to include other technologies, such as cold
atoms.
A primary goal of this work was to structure our analysis and
presentation methodology to use methods familiar to quantum
computing specialists but inspired by how Operations Research
views the quality of results from a solver in addressing opti-
mization problems. The methods are enhanced to account for
specific characteristics of quantum solutions, such as statistical
sampling or the iterative nature of the QAQA algorithm. They
can inform the user of bottlenecks or anomalies in execution,
which is extremely valuable.
These enhanced analysis and visualization techniques can
provide useful information about a quantum computing solu-
tion’s throughput and a detailed understanding of its total cost
of ownership. Results from these benchmarks can inform the
user about the factors that can be adjusted to improve perfor-
mance on these systems. While these techniques have been
used in Operations Research for a long time, applying them
effectively to quantum computing is still in the early stages.
This paper does not include a full-scale comparison between
quantum computing systems of di fferent types, nor does it
address benchmarking of classical solutions to optimization
problems, as numerous in-depth studies exist in this area. The
performance results in this paper are intended to illustrate the
features and benefits of our benchmarking framework. We in-
clude benchmarking the QA algorithm on annealing hardware
as a proxy for other solvers using different quantum technolo-
gies. Our work has identified many parameters that impact
how a quantum computer solves an optimization problem well.
However, we did not perform an exhaustive study of these or
all options that might produce optimal results. We do not at-
tempt to provide coverage or analysis over all possible settings
of algorithm parameters or vendor-specific execution options.
While we generally show that one class of device may pro-
vide higher-quality results while another may execute more
quickly, the emphasis in this paper is on how the benchmark
framework is structured and how it can be used to explore
quantum algorithm execution and performance. Users can exe-
cute these benchmark programs on devices to which they have
access and evaluate for themselves the total cost of ownership
of this technology. This is crucial to understanding how and
when quantum computers may be able to o ffer measurable
value.
We consider this work to be forward-looking with respect
to the available technology. The complexity of discrete op-
timization problems motivates the development of methods,
such as QAOA, QA, and others, that may be challenging in
the worst-case complexity analysis yet provide value in prac-
tice. Performance-based metrics and benchmarking tools can
quantify the progress of these proposed methods and provide
a way of comparing alternative solutions whose capabilities
are beyond those currently available. As quantum computers
evolve, the benchmark methods we have defined here will be
critical to gauge performance improvement.
CODE A V AILABILITY
The code for the benchmark suite introduced in this work
is available at https://github.com/SRI-International/QC-App-
Oriented-Benchmarks. Detailed instructions are provided in
the repository.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors acknowledge the use of IBM Quantum ser-
vices for this work. The views expressed are those of the
authors and do not reflect the official policy or position of IBM
or the IBM Quantum team. IBM Quantum, https: //quantum-
computing.ibm.com/, 2021.
We acknowledge IonQ for the contribution of access to
hardware. The views expressed are those of the authors and do
not reflect the official policy or position of IonQ.
We acknowledge D-Wave Systems for contributing access
to both hardware and software tools. The views expressed are
those of the authors and do not reflect the o fficial policy or
position of D-Wave Systems.
Contributions to this work from Los Alamos National Lab-
oratory were conducted under the auspices of the National
Nuclear Security Administration of the U.S. Department of En-
ergy under Contract No. 89233218CNA000001. This research
used resources provided by the Los Alamos National Labora-
tory Institutional Computing Program and was supported by
the Laboratory Directed Research and Development program
under the project 20210114ER.
D.B. acknowledges NASA Academic Mission Services (con-
tract NNA16BD14C – funded under SAA2-403506). P.S. ac-
knowledges support from the NASA/USRA Feynman Quan-
tum Academy Internship program. Both D.B. and P.S. are
supported by NSF Expeditions in Computing program CCF
#1918549. This work used computational and storage services
associated with the Hoffman2 Shared Cluster provided by the
UCLA Institute of Digital Research and Education’s Research
Technology Group.
D-Wave®, Ocean™, and Advantage™ are trademarks of
D-Wave Systems, Inc. IBM ®, Qiskit®, IBM Q® and IBM
Quantum System Two™ are trademarks of International Busi-
ness Machines Corporation. IonQ ™, IonQ Harmony™, and
IonQ Aria™ are trademarks of IonQ, Inc.
We acknowledge Jerry Gamble of Verizon Corporation for
his contribution to code development and editorial efforts on
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 18 =====

18
this manuscript. We acknowledge Jason Necaise in the De-
partment of Physics and Astronomy, Dartmouth College (pre-
viously with D-Wave Systems), for his contribution to code
development.
We thank Mark Johnson (D-Wave), Andrew Wack (IBM),
David McKay (IBM), Paul Nation (IBM), Luning Zhao (IonQ),
Ananth Kaushik (IonQ), Farshud Sorouifar (Ohio State Uni-
versity), Amos Anderson (Quantum Circuits), Steve Reinhardt
(Quantum Machines), Davide Venturelli (USRA/NASA), Filip
Maciejewski (USRA/NASA), and others for providing com-
ments on this manuscript.
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 19 =====

19
[1] Ehsan Zahedinejad and Arman Zaribafiyan. Combinatorial
optimization on gate model quantum computers: A survey,
2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.05294.
[2] Daniel J. Egger, Claudio Gambella, Jakub Marecek, Scott Mc-
Faddin, Martin Mevissen, Rudy Raymond, Andrea Simon-
etto, Stefan Woerner, and Elena Yndurain. Quantum comput-
ing for finance: State-of-the-art and future prospects. IEEE
Transactions on Quantum Engineering , 1:1–24, 2020. doi:
10.1109/TQE.2020.3030314.
[3] Catherine C. McGeoch and Cong Wang. Experimental eval-
uation of an adiabiatic quantum system for combinatorial op-
timization. In Proceedings of the ACM International Con-
ference on Computing Frontiers , CF ’13, New York, NY ,
USA, 2013. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
9781450320535. doi:10.1145/2482767.2482797. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2482767.2482797.
[4] A.B. Finnila, M.A. Gomez, C. Sebenik, C. Stenson, and J.D.
Doll. Quantum annealing: A new method for minimizing multi-
dimensional functions. Chemical Physics Letters, 219(5):343 –
348, 1994. ISSN 0009-2614. doi:https: //doi.org/10.1016/0009-
2614(94)00117-0. URL http://www.sciencedirect.co
m/science/article/pii/0009261494001170.
[5] Tadashi Kadowaki and Hidetoshi Nishimori. Quantum anneal-
ing in the transverse Ising model. Phys. Rev. E, 58:5355–5363,
Nov 1998. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.58.5355.
[6] Edward Farhi, Jeffrey Goldstone, and Sam Gutmann. A Quan-
tum Approximate Optimization Algorithm. (arXiv:1411.4028),
November 2014. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1411.4028.
[7] Gavin E. Crooks. Performance of the Quantum Approxi-
mate Optimization Algorithm on the Maximum Cut Problem,
November 2018.
[8] Jonathan Wurtz and Peter Love. MaxCut quantum approx-
imate optimization algorithm performance guarantees for
$p>1$. Physical Review A, 103(4):042612, April 2021. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevA.103.042612.
[9] Immanuel Trummer and Christoph Koch. Multiple query opti-
mization on the d-wave 2x adiabatic quantum computer, 2015.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1510.06437.
[10] Yuchen Pang, Carleton Coffrin, Andrey Y . Lokhov, and Marc
Vuffray. The potential of quantum annealing for rapid solution
structure identification. Constraints, 26(1):1–25, Oct 2021.
ISSN 1572-9354. doi:10.1007 /s10601-020-09315-0. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10601-020-09315-0 .
[11] Byron Tasseff, Tameem Albash, Zachary Morrell, Marc Vuffray,
Andrey Y . Lokhov, Sidhant Misra, and Carleton Coffrin. On
the emerging potential of quantum annealing hardware for
combinatorial optimization, 2022. URL https://arxiv.or
g/abs/2210.04291.
[12] M. R. Garey, D. S. Johnson, and L. Stockmeyer. Some sim-
plified NP-complete graph problems. Theoretical Computer
Science, 1(3):237–267, February 1976. ISSN 0304-3975. doi:
10.1016/0304-3975(76)90059-1.
[13] Christos H. Papadimitriou and Mihalis Yannakakis. Opti-
mization, approximation, and complexity classes. Journal
of Computer and System Sciences, 43(3):425–440, 1991. ISSN
0022-0000. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0000(91)90023-
X. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ar
ticle/pii/002200009190023X.
[14] Application-Oriented Performance Benchmarks for Quantum
Computing, 2015. URL https://github.com/SRI-Inter
national/QC-App-Oriented-Benchmarks .
[15] Thomas Lubinski, Sonika Johri, Paul Varosy, Jeremiah Cole-
man, Luning Zhao, Jason Necaise, Charles H. Baldwin,
Karl Mayer, and Timothy Proctor. Application-oriented
performance benchmarks for quantum computing. IEEE
Transactions on Quantum Engineering , 4:1–32, 2023. doi:
10.1109/TQE.2023.3253761.
[16] Danylo Lykov, Ruslan Shaydulin, Yue Sun, Yuri Alexeev, and
Marco Pistoia. Fast simulation of high-depth qaoa circuits.
In Proceedings of the SC ’23 Workshops of The International
Conference on High Performance Computing, Network, Stor-
age, and Analysis, SC-W 2023. ACM, November 2023. doi:
10.1145/3624062.3624216. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1145/3624062.3624216.
[17] Yingyue Zhu, Zewen Zhang, Bhuvanesh Sundar, Alaina M
Green, C Huerta Alderete, Nhung H Nguyen, Kaden R A
Hazzard, and Norbert M Linke. Multi-round qaoa and advanced
mixers on a trapped-ion quantum computer. Quantum Science
and Technology, 8(1):015007, nov 2022. doi:10.1088 /2058-
9565/ac91ef. URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/205
8-9565/ac91ef.
[18] Ritajit Majumdar, Dhiraj Madan, Debasmita Bhoumik, Dhi-
nakaran Vinayagamurthy, Shesha Raghunathan, and Susmita
Sur-Kolay. Optimizing ansatz design in qaoa for max-cut, 2021.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.02812.
[19] Rebekah Herrman, Phillip C. Lotshaw, James Ostrowski,
Travis S. Humble, and George Siopsis. Multi-angle quan-
tum approximate optimization algorithm, 2021. URL https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41598-022-10555-8 .
[20] Rebekah Herrman. Relating the multi-angle quantum approx-
imate optimization algorithm and continuous-time quantum
walks on dynamic graphs, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2209.00415.
[21] Kaiyan Shi, Rebekah Herrman, Ruslan Shaydulin, Shouvanik
Chakrabarti, Marco Pistoia, and Je ffrey Larson. Multiangle
qaoa does not always need all its angles. In 2022 IEEE/ACM
7th Symposium on Edge Computing (SEC). IEEE, December
2022. doi:10.1109/sec54971.2022.00062. URL http://dx.d
oi.org/10.1109/SEC54971.2022.00062.
[22] Michelle Chalupnik, Hans Melo, Yuri Alexeev, and Alexey
Galda. Augmenting qaoa ansatz with multiparameter problem-
independent layer, 2022. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/9951267.
[23] V . Vijendran, Aritra Das, Dax Enshan Koh, Syed M. Assad, and
Ping Koy Lam. An expressive ansatz for low-depth quantum
optimisation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302
.04479.
[24] Marco Sciorilli, Lucas Borges, Taylor L. Patti, Diego García-
Martín, Giancarlo Camilo, Anima Anandkumar, and Leandro
Aolita. Towards large-scale quantum optimization solvers with
few qubits, 2024.
[25] Daniel Beaulieu and Anh Pham. Evaluating performance of
hybrid quantum optimization algorithms for maxcut clustering
using ibm runtime environment, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2112.03199.
[26] David Amaro, Carlo Modica, Matthias Rosenkranz, Mattia
Fiorentini, Marcello Benedetti, and Michael Lubasch. Filtering
variational quantum algorithms for combinatorial optimization.
Quantum Science and Technology, 7(1):015021, jan 2022. doi:
10.1088/2058-9565/ac3e54. URL https://doi.org/10.1
088%2F2058-9565%2Fac3e54.
[27] Linghua Zhu, Ho Lun Tang, George S. Barron, F. A. Calderon-
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 20 =====

20
Vargas, Nicholas J. Mayhall, Edwin Barnes, and Sophia E.
Economou. An adaptive quantum approximate optimization
algorithm for solving combinatorial problems on a quantum
computer, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.102
58.
[28] Johan Håstad. Some optimal inapproximability results. Journal
of the ACM, 48(4):798–859, July 2001. ISSN 0004-5411. doi:
10.1145/502090.502098.
[29] Fred Glover, Gary Kochenberger, and Yu Du. A tutorial on
formulating and using qubo models, 2018. URL https://ar
xiv.org/abs/1811.11538.
[30] Leo Zhou, Sheng-Tao Wang, Soonwon Choi, Hannes Pichler,
and Mikhail D. Lukin. Quantum approximate optimization
algorithm: Performance, mechanism, and implementation on
near-term devices. Physical Review X, 10(2), jun 2020. doi:
10.1103/physrevx.10.021067. URL https://doi.org/10.1
103%2Fphysrevx.10.021067.
[31] Andrew Lucas. Ising formulations of many NP problems.
Frontiers in Physics, 2, 2014. doi:10.3389 /fphy.2014.00005.
URL https://doi.org/10.3389%2Ffphy.2014.00005.
[32] Francisco Barahona, Martin Grötschel, Michael Jünger, and
Gerhard Reinelt. An Application of Combinatorial Optimiza-
tion to Statistical Physics and Circuit Layout Design. Opera-
tions Research, 36(3):493–513, June 1988. ISSN 0030-364X.
doi:10.1287/opre.36.3.493.
[33] Bahram Alidaee, Gary A. Kochenberger, and Ahmad Ahma-
dian. 0-1 Quadratic programming approach for optimum so-
lutions of two scheduling problems. International Journal of
Systems Science, 25(2):401–408, February 1994. ISSN 0020-
7721. doi:10.1080/00207729408928968.
[34] Cristina Bazgan and Zsolt Tuza. Combinatorial 5 /6-
approximation of max cut in graphs of maximum degree 3.
Journal of Discrete Algorithms , 6(3):510–519, 2008. ISSN
1570-8667. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jda.2007.02.002. URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1570866707000822.
[35] M. Cerezo, Andrew Arrasmith, Ryan Babbush, Simon C. Ben-
jamin, Suguru Endo, Keisuke Fujii, Jarrod R. McClean, Kosuke
Mitarai, Xiao Yuan, Lukasz Cincio, and Patrick J. Coles. Vari-
ational quantum algorithms. Nature Reviews Physics, 3(9):
625–644, aug 2021. doi:10.1038/s42254-021-00348-9. URL
https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs42254-021-00348-9 .
[36] E. Knill, D. Leibfried, R. Reichle, J. Britton, R. B. Blakestad,
J. D. Jost, C. Langer, R. Ozeri, S. Seidelin, and D. J. Wineland.
Randomized benchmarking of quantum gates. Phys. Rev. A, 77:
012307, Jan 2008. doi:10.1103 /PhysRevA.77.012307. URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.77.0
12307.
[37] Easwar Magesan, J. M. Gambetta, and Joseph Emerson. Scal-
able and robust randomized benchmarking of quantum pro-
cesses. Phys. Rev. Lett. , 106:180504, May 2011. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.180504. URL https://link.aps
.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.180504.
[38] Robin Blume-Kohout, John King Gamble, Erik Nielsen, Ken-
neth Rudinger, Jonathan Mizrahi, Kevin Fortier, and Peter
Maunz. Demonstration of qubit operations below a rigorous
fault tolerance threshold with gate set tomography. Nat. Com-
mun., 8:14485, February 2017. doi:10.1038 /ncomms14485.
URL https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms1448
5.
[39] Jay M Gambetta, AD Córcoles, Seth T Merkel, Blake R
Johnson, John A Smolin, Jerry M Chow, Colm A Ryan,
Chad Rigetti, S Poletto, Thomas A Ohki, et al. Characteri-
zation of addressability by simultaneous randomized bench-
marking. Phys. Rev. Lett. , 109(24):240504, 2012. URL
https://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.110
3/PhysRevLett.109.240504.
[40] Mohan Sarovar, Timothy Proctor, Kenneth Rudinger, Kevin
Young, Erik Nielsen, and Robin Blume-Kohout. Detecting
crosstalk errors in quantum information processors. Quantum,
4:321, 2020. URL https://quantum-journal.org/pap
ers/q-2020-09-11-321/ .
[41] Timothy Proctor, Stefan Seritan, Kenneth Rudinger, Erik
Nielsen, Robin Blume-Kohout, and Kevin Young. Scalable
randomized benchmarking of quantum computers using mirror
circuits. Physical Review Letters, 129(15), October 2022. ISSN
1079-7114. doi:10.1103/physrevlett.129.150502. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.129.150502.
[42] David C. McKay, Ian Hincks, Emily J. Pritchett, Malcolm
Carroll, Luke C. G. Govia, and Seth T. Merkel. Benchmarking
quantum processor performance at scale, 2023. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2311.05933.
[43] Andrew W. Cross, Lev S. Bishop, Sarah Sheldon, Paul D.
Nation, and Jay M. Gambetta. Validating quantum computers
using randomized model circuits. Physical Review A, 100(3),
Sep 2019. ISSN 2469-9934. doi:10.1103/physreva.100.032328.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.100.03
2328.
[44] The Qiskit Team. Measuring quantum volume, Aug 2021. URL
https://qiskit.org/textbook/ch-quantum-hardwar
e/measuring-quantum-volume.html.
[45] Robin Blume-Kohout and Kevin C. Young. A volumetric
framework for quantum computer benchmarks. Quantum, 4:
362, November 2020. ISSN 2521-327X. doi:10.22331 /q-2020-
11-15-362. URL https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2020-1
1-15-362.
[46] Timothy Proctor, Kenneth Rudinger, Kevin Young, Erik
Nielsen, and Robin Blume-Kohout. Measuring the capabil-
ities of quantum computers, 2020.
[47] Mark Johnson, Mohammad Amin, S Gildert, Trevor Lant-
ing, F Hamze, N Dickson, R Harris, Andrew Berkley, Jan
Johansson, Paul Bunyk, E Chapple, C Enderud, Jeremy Hilton,
Kamran Karimi, E Ladizinsky, Nicolas Ladizinsky, T Oh,
I Perminov, C Rich, and Geordie Rose. Quantum anneal-
ing with manufactured spins. Nature, 473:194–8, 05 2011.
doi:10.1038/nature10012.
[48] Alejandro Perdomo-Ortiz, Alexander Feldman, Asier Oza-
eta, Sergei V . Isakov, Zheng Zhu, Bryan O’Gorman, Hel-
mut G. Katzgraber, Alexander Diedrich, Hartmut Neven, Jo-
han de Kleer, Brad Lackey, and Rupak Biswas. Readi-
ness of quantum optimization machines for industrial appli-
cations. Physical Review Applied , 12(1), jul 2019. doi:
10.1103/physrevapplied.12.014004. URL https://doi.or
g/10.1103%2Fphysrevapplied.12.014004.
[49] Bikas K Chakrabarti and Sudip Mukherjee. Quantum annealing
and computation, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/22
03.15839.
[50] Neil G. Dickson, M. William Johnson, Mohammad H. S. Amin,
R. Harris, F. Altomare, Andrew J. Berkley, Paul I. Bunyk,
J. Cai, E. M. Chapple, P Chavez, Florentin Cioat ˘a, T Cirip,
P Debuen, Marshall Drew-Brook, C. Enderud, S. Gildert, Firas
Hamze, Jeremy P. Hilton, E. Hoskinson, Kamran Karimi, Eric
Ladizinsky, Nicolas Ladizinsky, Trevor Lanting, Timothy Ma-
hon, Richard Bryon Neufeld, Travis Oh, I. G. Perminov, C P
Petroff, Anthony J. Przybysz, Chris Rich, P. Spear, Adi Tcaciuc,
Murray C. Thom, Elena Tolkacheva, Sergey Uchaikin, J. Wang,
A. B. Wilson, Zeeya Merali, and Geordie Rose. Thermally
assisted quantum annealing of a 16-qubit problem. Nature
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 21 =====

21
communications, 4:1903, 2013.
[51] T. Lanting, A. J. Przybysz, A. Yu. Smirnov, F. M. Spedalieri,
M. H. Amin, A. J. Berkley, R. Harris, F. Altomare, S. Boixo,
P. Bunyk, N. Dickson, C. Enderud, J. P. Hilton, E. Hoskin-
son, M. W. Johnson, E. Ladizinsky, N. Ladizinsky, R. Neufeld,
T. Oh, I. Perminov, C. Rich, M. C. Thom, E. Tolkacheva,
S. Uchaikin, A. B. Wilson, and G. Rose. Entanglement in
a quantum annealing processor. Physical Review X , 4(2),
may 2014. doi:10.1103 /physrevx.4.021041. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1103%2Fphysrevx.4.021041.
[52] Tristan Zaborniak and Rogério de Sousa. Benchmarking
hamiltonian noise in the d-wave quantum annealer. IEEE
Transactions on Quantum Engineering , 2:1–6, 2021. doi:
10.1109/TQE.2021.3050449.
[53] Jon Nelson, Marc Vuffray, Andrey Y . Lokhov, and Carleton
Coffrin. Single-qubit fidelity assessment of quantum annealing
hardware. IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering , 2:
1–10, 2021. doi:10.1109/TQE.2021.3092710.
[54] Marc Vuffray, Carleton Co ffrin, Yaroslav A. Kharkov, and
Andrey Y . Lokhov. Programmable quantum annealers as noisy
gibbs samplers. PRX Quantum, 3:020317, Apr 2022. doi:
10.1103/PRXQuantum.3.020317. URL https://link.aps
.org/doi/10.1103/PRXQuantum.3.020317.
[55] Daniel C Murphy and Kenneth R Brown. Controlling error
orientation to improve quantum algorithm success rates. Phys.
Rev. A, 99(3):032318, 2019. URL https://journals.aps
.org/pra/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevA.99.032318.
[56] James King, Sheir Yarkoni, Mayssam M. Nevisi, Jeremy P.
Hilton, and Catherine C. McGeoch. Benchmarking a quantum
annealing processor with the time-to-target metric, 2015. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1508.05087.
[57] David Subires, Fernando J. Gó mez-Ruiz, Antonia Ruiz-
García, Daniel Alonso, and Adolfo del Campo. Benchmark-
ing quantum annealing dynamics: The spin-vector langevin
model. Physical Review Research , 4(2), may 2022. doi:
10.1103/physrevresearch.4.023104. URL https://doi.org/
10.1103%2Fphysrevresearch.4.023104.
[58] Antika Sinha. Development of research network on quantum
annealing computation and information using google scholar
data, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.02176.
[59] S. Kirkpatrick, C. D. Gelatt, and M. P. Vecchi. Optimization
by simulated annealing. Science, 220(4598):671–680, 1983.
doi:10.1126/science.220.4598.671. URL https://www.scie
nce.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.220.4598.671.
[60] Charlie J. Geyer. Parallel tempering. In E. M. Keramidas
and S. M. Kaufman, editors, Computing Science and Statistics
Proceedings of the 23rd Symposium on the Interface, page 156,
New York, 1991. American Statistical Association.
[61] Bor1928Zheng Zhu, Andrew J. Ochoa, and Helmut G. Katz-
graber. E fficient cluster algorithm for spin glasses in any
space dimension. Phys. Rev. Lett., 115:077201, August 2015.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.115.077201. URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett
.115.077201.
[62] Carleton Coffrin, Harsha Nagarajan, and Russell Bent. Eval-
uating Ising processing units with integer programming. In
Louis-Martin Rousseau and Kostas Stergiou, editors, Integra-
tion of Constraint Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and
Operations Research, pages 163–181, Cham, 2019. Springer
International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-19212-9.
[63] Itay Hen, Joshua Job, Tameem Albash, Troels F. Røn-
now, Matthias Troyer, and Daniel A. Lidar. Probing
for quantum speedup in spin-glass problems with planted
solutions. Phys. Rev. A , 92:042325, Oct 2015. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevA.92.042325. URL https://link.aps
.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.92.042325.
[64] Dilina Perera, Inimfon Akpabio, Firas Hamze, Salvatore Man-
dra, Nathan Rose, Maliheh Aramon, and Helmut G. Katz-
graber. Chook – a comprehensive suite for generating binary
optimization problems with planted solutions, 2020. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14344.
[65] Matthew Kowalsky, Tameem Albash, Itay Hen, and Daniel A.
Lidar. 3-regular 3-xorsat planted solutions benchmark of classi-
cal and quantum heuristic optimizers. 2021. doi:10.1088 /2058-
9565/ac4d1b.
[66] Ang Li, Samuel Stein, Sriram Krishnamoorthy, and James
Ang. Qasmbench: A low-level qasm benchmark suite for nisq
evaluation and simulation, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2005.13018.
[67] Teague Tomesh, Pranav Gokhale, Victory Omole, Gokul Sub-
ramanian Ravi, Kaitlin N. Smith, Joshua Viszlai, Xin-Chuan
Wu, Nikos Hardavellas, Margaret R. Martonosi, and Frederic T.
Chong. Supermarq: A scalable quantum benchmark suite,
2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.11045.
[68] Huub Donkers, Koen Mesman, Zaid Al-Ars, and Matthias
Möller. Qpack scores: Quantitative performance metrics for
application-oriented quantum computer benchmarking, 2022.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.12142.
[69] Jernej Rudi Finžgar, Philipp Ross, Leonhard Hölscher, Jo-
hannes Klepsch, and Andre Luckow. Quark: A framework for
quantum computing application benchmarking, 2022. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.03028.
[70] Ward van der Schoot, Daan Leermakers, Robert Wezeman,
Niels Neumann, and Frank Phillipson. Evaluating the q-score
of quantum annealers. In 2022 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Quantum Software (QSW) . IEEE, jul 2022. doi:
10.1109/qsw55613.2022.00017. URL https://doi.org/10
.1109%2Fqsw55613.2022.00017.
[71] Blake Johnson and Ismael Faro. Ibm quantum delivers 120x
speedup of quantum workloads with qiskit runtime, May 2021.
URL https://research.ibm.com/blog/120x-quantum
-speedup?lnk=ushpv18re2.
[72] K. Bertels, A. Sarkar, T. Hubregtsen., M. Serrao, A. A. Moue-
denne, A. Yadav, A. Krol, and I. Ashraf. Quantum computer
architecture: Towards full-stack quantum accelerators. 2020
Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference& Exhibition
(DATE), Mar 2020. doi:10.23919 /date48585.2020.9116502.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.23919/DATE48585.2020
.9116502.
[73] Matthias Möller and Cornelis Vuik. On the impact of quan-
tum computing technology on future developments in high-
performance scientific computing. Ethics and Information
Technology, 19(4):253–269, Aug 2017. ISSN 1572-8439. doi:
10.1007/s10676-017-9438-0. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s10676-017-9438-0 .
[74] Yudong Cao and Timothy Hirzel. Quantum acceleration in
2020, Dec 2020. URL https://www.infoq.com/articles
/quantum-acceleration-2020/.
[75] Frank Arute, Kunal Arya, Ryan Babbush, Dave Bacon,
Joseph C Bardin, Rami Barends, Rupak Biswas, Sergio Boixo,
Fernando G S L Brandao, David A Buell, Brian Burkett,
Yu Chen, Zijun Chen, Ben Chiaro, Roberto Collins, William
Courtney, Andrew Dunsworth, Edward Farhi, Brooks Foxen,
Austin Fowler, Craig Gidney, Marissa Giustina, Rob Gra ff,
Keith Guerin, Steve Habegger, Matthew P Harrigan, Michael J
Hartmann, Alan Ho, Markus Hoffmann, Trent Huang, Travis S
Humble, Sergei V Isakov, Evan Je ffrey, Zhang Jiang, Dvir
Kafri, Kostyantyn Kechedzhi, Julian Kelly, Paul V Klimov,
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 22 =====

22
Sergey Knysh, Alexander Korotkov, Fedor Kostritsa, David
Landhuis, Mike Lindmark, Erik Lucero, Dmitry Lyakh, Sal-
vatore Mandrà, Jarrod R McClean, Matthew McEwen, An-
thony Megrant, Xiao Mi, Kristel Michielsen, Masoud Mohseni,
Josh Mutus, Ofer Naaman, Matthew Neeley, Charles Neill,
Murphy Yuezhen Niu, Eric Ostby, Andre Petukhov, John C
Platt, Chris Quintana, Eleanor G Rie ffel, Pedram Roushan,
Nicholas C Rubin, Daniel Sank, Kevin J Satzinger, Vadim
Smelyanskiy, Kevin J Sung, Matthew D Trevithick, Amit
Vainsencher, Benjamin Villalonga, Theodore White, Z Jamie
Yao, Ping Yeh, Adam Zalcman, Hartmut Neven, and John M
Martinis. Quantum supremacy using a programmable supercon-
ducting processor. Nature, 574(7779):505–510, 2019. ISSN
0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1666-5. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1666-5 .
[76] Han-Sen Zhong, Hui Wang, Yu-Hao Deng, Ming-Cheng Chen,
Li-Chao Peng, Yi-Han Luo, Jian Qin, Dian Wu, Xing Ding,
Yi Hu, Peng Hu, Xiao-Yan Yang, Wei-Jun Zhang, Hao Li,
Yuxuan Li, Xiao Jiang, Lin Gan, Guangwen Yang, Lixing
You, Zhen Wang, Li Li, Nai-Le Liu, Chao-Yang Lu, and Jian-
Wei Pan. Quantum computational advantage using photons.
Science, 370(6523):1460–1463, 2020. ISSN 0036-8075, 1095-
9203. doi:10.1126/science.abe8770. URL http://dx.doi.o
rg/10.1126/science.abe8770.
[77] Juneseo Lee, Alicia B. Magann, Herschel A. Rabitz, and
Christian Arenz. Progress toward favorable landscapes in
quantum combinatorial optimization. Physical Review A ,
104(3), sep 2021. doi:10.1103 /physreva.104.032401. URL
https://doi.org/10.1103%2Fphysreva.104.032401.
[78] Jonathan Ward, Johannes Otterbach, Gavin Crooks, Nicholas
Rubin, and Marcus da Silva. QAOA Performance Benchmarks
using Max-Cut. In APS March Meeting Abstracts , volume
2018 of APS Meeting Abstracts, page R15.007, January 2018.
[79] Gavin E. Crooks. Performance of the quantum approximate
optimization algorithm on the maximum cut problem, 2018.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.08419.
[80] Byron Tasseff, Tameem Albash, Zachary Morrell, Marc Vuffray,
Andrey Y . Lokhov, Sidhant Misra, and Carleton Coffrin. On
the emerging potential of quantum annealing hardware for
combinatorial optimization, 2022. URL https://arxiv.or
g/abs/2210.04291.
[81] Hristo N. Djidjev, Guillaume Chapuis, Georg Hahn, and Guil-
laume Rizk. Efficient combinatorial optimization using quan-
tum annealing, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1801
.08653.
[82] Tameem Albash and Daniel A. Lidar. Demonstration of
a scaling advantage for a quantum annealer over simu-
lated annealing. Physical Review X , 8(3), jul 2018. doi:
10.1103/physrevx.8.031016. URL https://doi.org/10
.1103%2Fphysrevx.8.031016.
[83] S. Ebadi, A. Keesling, M. Cain, T. T. Wang, H. Levine,
D. Bluvstein, G. Semeghini, A. Omran, J.-G. Liu, R. Sama-
jdar, X.-Z. Luo, B. Nash, X. Gao, B. Barak, E. Farhi,
S. Sachdev, N. Gemelke, L. Zhou, S. Choi, H. Pichler, S.-
T. Wang, M. Greiner, V . Vuleti´c, and M. D. Lukin. Quan-
tum optimization of maximum independent set using rydberg
atom arrays. Science, 376(6598):1209–1215, 2022. doi:
10.1126/science.abo6587. URL https://www.science.
org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.abo6587.
[84] Troels F. Rønnow, Zhihui Wang, Joshua Job, Sergio Boixo,
Sergei V . Isakov, David Wecker, John M. Martinis, Daniel A.
Lidar, and Matthias Troyer. Defining and detecting quan-
tum speedup. Science, 345(6195):420–424, jul 2014. doi:
10.1126/science.1252319. URL https://doi.org/10.112
6%2Fscience.1252319.
[85] Salvatore Mandrà and Helmut G Katzgraber. A deceptive
step towards quantum speedup detection. Quantum Science
and Technology, 3(4):04LT01, jul 2018. doi:10.1088 /2058-
9565/aac8b2. URL https://doi.org/10.1088%2F2058-9
565%2Faac8b2.
[86] NetworkX. NetworkX - Network Analysis in Python. https:
//networkx.org/, 2023. NetworkX Web Site.
[87] Gurobi. Gurobi Optimization. https://www.gurobi.com/,
2023. Gurobi Web Site.
[88] Madita Willsch, Dennis Willsch, Fengping Jin, Hans De Raedt,
and Kristel Michielsen. Benchmarking the quantum approxi-
mate optimization algorithm. Quantum Information Process-
ing, 19(7):197, July 2020. ISSN 1570-0755, 1573-1332. doi:
10.1007/s11128-020-02692-8.
[89] Panagiotis Kl Barkoutsos, Giacomo Nannicini, Anton Robert,
Ivano Tavernelli, and Stefan Woerner. Improving Variational
Quantum Optimization using CVaR. Quantum, 4:256, April
2020. doi:10.22331/q-2020-04-20-256.
[90] Li Li, Minjie Fan, Marc Coram, Patrick Riley, and Stefan
Leichenauer. Quantum optimization with a novel Gibbs
objective function and ansatz architecture search. Phys-
ical Review Research , 2(2):023074, April 2020. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.023074.
[91] IBM Cloud Qiskit Runtime. https://cloud.ibm.com/qu
antum, 2023. accessed 2023-05-15.
[92] Endre Boros, Peter L Hammer, and Gabriel Tavares. Local
search heuristics for quadratic unconstrained binary optimiza-
tion (qubo). Journal of Heuristics, 13(2):99–132, 2007.
[93] Gary Kochenberger, Jin-Kao Hao, Fred Glover, Mark Lewis,
Zhipeng Lü, Haibo Wang, and Yang Wang. The unconstrained
binary quadratic programming problem: a survey. Journal of
combinatorial optimization, 28(1):58–81, 2014.
[94] M. Born and V . Fock. Beweis des adiabatensatzes.Zeitschrift
für Physik, 51(3):165–180, 1928. doi:10.1007 /BF01343193.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01343193.
[95] Tosio Kato. On the adiabatic theorem of quantum mechanics.
Journal of the Physical Society of Japan, 5(6):435–439, 1950.
doi:10.1143/JPSJ.5.435. URL https://doi.org/10.1143/
JPSJ.5.435.
[96] Sabine Jansen, Mary-Beth Ruskai, and Ruedi Seiler. Bounds
for the adiabatic approximation with applications to quantum
computation. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 48(10):102111,
2007. doi:10.1063 /1.2798382. URL https://doi.org/10
.1063/1.2798382.
[97] Vicky Choi. Minor-embedding in adiabatic quantum computa-
tion: I. the parameter setting problem. Quantum Information
Processing, 7:193–209, 2008.
[98] Andrew Wack, Hanhee Paik, Ali Javadi-Abhari, Petar Jurce-
vic, Ismael Faro, Jay M. Gambetta, and Blake R. Johnson.
Quality, speed, and scale: three key attributes to measure the
performance of near-term quantum computers, 2021. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.14108.
[99] Lennart Bittel and Martin Kliesch. Training Varia-
tional Quantum Algorithms Is NP-Hard. Physical Re-
view Letters , 127(12):120502, September 2021. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.120502.
[100] Jarrod R. McClean, Sergio Boixo, Vadim N. Smelyanskiy,
Ryan Babbush, and Hartmut Neven. Barren plateaus in quan-
tum neural network training landscapes. Nature Communi-
cations, 9(1):4812, November 2018. ISSN 2041-1723. doi:
10.1038/s41467-018-07090-4.
[101] M. Cerezo, Akira Sone, Tyler V olkoff, Lukasz Cincio, and
Patrick J. Coles. Cost function dependent barren plateaus
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 23 =====

23
in shallow parametrized quantum circuits. Nature Commu-
nications, 12(1):1791, March 2021. ISSN 2041-1723. doi:
10.1038/s41467-021-21728-w.
[102] Samson Wang, Enrico Fontana, M. Cerezo, Kunal Sharma,
Akira Sone, Lukasz Cincio, and Patrick J. Coles. Noise-induced
barren plateaus in variational quantum algorithms. Nature
Communications, 12(1):6961, November 2021. ISSN 2041-
1723. doi:10.1038/s41467-021-27045-6.
[103] Carlos Ortiz Marrero, Mária Kieferová, and Nathan Wiebe.
Entanglement Induced Barren Plateaus. (arXiv:2010.15968),
March 2021. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2010.15968.
[104] Jonathan Wurtz and Danylo Lykov. Fixed-angle conjectures
for the quantum approximate optimization algorithm on regular
MaxCut graphs. Physical Review A, 104(5):052419, November
2021. doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.104.052419.
[105] V . Akshay, D. Rabinovich, E. Campos, and J. Biamonte. Pa-
rameter concentrations in quantum approximate optimization.
Physical Review A, 104(1):L010401, July 2021. ISSN 2469-
9926, 2469-9934. doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.104.L010401.
[106] David Bernal Neira, Davide Venturelli, Filip Wudarski, and
Eleanor Rie ffel. Benchmarking the operation of quantum
heuristics and ising machines: Scoring parameter setting strate-
gies on real world optimization applications. In APS March
Meeting Abstracts, volume 2022, pages F38–005, 2022.
[107] Stochastic benchmark. https://github.com/usra-riacs
/stochastic-benchmark, 2022.
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 24 =====

24
Appendix A: Methods for Combinatorial Optimization
We present a general introduction to the theoretical founda-
tions of combinatorial optimization problems and their impli-
cations for developing the hardware demonstrations to study
solver performance (a solver is an algorithm or heuristic im-
plemented in software or hardware). The issues discussed
here informed our decisions about the choice of inputs and
performance metrics in designing the QED-C benchmarking
framework.
1. Combinatorial Optimization Theory
For concreteness, we consider the class of combinatorial
optimization problems defined on n integer-valued variables
x ={x1,... xn}, containing m constraint functions c(x), and
one objective function f that is a polynomial in x, as follows.
min : f (x)
s.t.: ci(x)≤ 0 ∀i∈{ 1,..., m}
xi∈ Z ∀i∈{ 1,..., n} (A1)
Given a problem thus described, the algorithmic goal is to
find an assignment of integer values to x that obeys all the
constraints and minimizes the value of f (x). For example, this
simple problem,
f (x) = x1 + 2x2
c1(x) : −x1 + 1≤ 0
c2(x) : −x2 + 1≤ 0,
asks to find two positive integers that minimizef (x); an optimal
solution x1 = 1, x2 = 1 has the objective value f (x) = 3.
This notation is general enough to cover an enormous variety
of optimization problems of interest to all industry sectors. To
name just a few:
• The Job Shop Scheduling problem and its variations are
ubiquitous in industry scheduling problems associated
with the e fficient assignment of multiple resources to
multiple tasks.
• The Portfolio Optimization problem is of interest to
finance. For example, given a list of items to purchase,
select a subset of items to maximize profit and minimize
risk.
• The Airport Gate Scheduling problem in the trans-
portation industry is as follows: Given a list of airport
arrival times and passenger connections, assign gates to
airplanes to minimize the total distance passengers must
walk to the connecting gates.
• Machine Learning (ML) is a core problem of Artificial
Intelligence. Most ML techniques require access to
good-quality optimization heuristics as part of an inner-
loop computation that may be performed hundreds or
thousands of times. The heuristic finds input /output
pairs that constitute diverse samples of the near-optimal
solution space of a given optimization problem.
The complexity class NP-OPT contains optimization prob-
lems (including (A1)) that are defined in terms of an objective
function with a numerical result, as opposed to decision prob-
lems with binary outcomes (e.g., Yes/No or True/False), which
inhabit the more famous class NP.
Every problem P in NP can be reformulated (also called
translated) as a problem P-OPT in NP-OPT. For example, in
the binary Satisfiability ( SAT) problem, Given the Boolean
expression B, does there exist an assignment of variables such
that B evaluates to True? can be translated to an equivalent
problem in NP-OPT: Given B-OPT, find an assignment of
variables that maximizes the number of satisfied clauses. The
transformation guarantees that an optimal solution toSAT-OPT
is a yes answer to SAT. In this case, the maximum number of
satisfied clauses equals the total number of clauses inB− OPT ,
then the answer to the binary problem is yes.
The translated SAT-OPTproblem is called NP-HARD be-
cause a polynomial-time algorithm for SAT-OPT could be
used to solve SAT, and by extension, every problem in NP
could be solved in polynomial time. Problems that are both
NP-HARD and in NP (i.e., binary decision problems) are
called NP-COMPLETE. The famously open question Does
P = NP? captures the current unhappy state of knowledge
about these problems: no polynomial-time algorithm is known
to exist, and no one can prove that they cannot exist.
Solving Problems by Translation Among many ap-
proaches to solving problems in NP and NP-OPT, solution-
by-transformation has been studied for a handful of problems
and algorithms.
This approach is attractive to practitioners when a single
solver for the target problem T can be applied to a wide variety
of problems that arise in practice: that is when the overhead
cost of translating individual inputs to match the formulation
for T is less than the overhead cost of implementing a problem-
specific solver for each new problem that arises.
The most widely studied versions of this approach involve
a subset of problems formulated as (A1), known as integer
linear problems, which can be solved in polynomial time when
the objective function f (x) and constraints ci(x) are all linear.
Another common approach is translating problems to SAT or
SAT-OPT, for which efficient heuristics are sometimes known.
The quadratic unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO)
problem has also been considered as a general-purpose target
formulation, especially for problems defined on graphs, be-
fore quantum computing came onto the scene [ 92, 93]. The
emergence of quantum annealing processors that solve QU-
BOs natively in hardware has sparked recent interest in QUBO
and its variation, the Ising Model (IM) problem, often used in
physics applications. The two problems are identical, except
for the change in the domain from binary variables x∈{ 0, 1}
(QUBO) to spin variables s∈{− 1, +1} (IM).
The theory ofNP-COMPLETEness tells us that, in principle,
any input for a problem formulated as (A1) can be transformed
in polynomial time into a formulation that can be solved di-
rectly using a quantum computer. See [ 29, 31] for tutorials
on formulating general optimization problems expressed by
(A1) as QUBOs and IMs. However, due to their small size,
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 25 =====

25
the problems currently being tested on quantum platforms are
significantly restricted.
Appendix B: Quantum Heuristics for Optimization Problems
The benchmarking framework measures performance char-
acteristics of the two leading quantum heuristics for solving
combinatorial optimization problems: the Quantum Approx-
imate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA), which uses a gate-
model quantum computer, and Quantum Annealing (QA),
which uses an analog quantum computer. This paper presents
a benchmark of these algorithms in the context of their appli-
cation to solving the Max-Cut problem.
The input for a Max-Cut problem is an undirected graph
consisting of nodes or vertices (V) and edges (E). In general,
each edge of the graph can be accompanied by a ‘weight’, but
we only consider unweighted 3-regular graphs in this paper. A
cut partitions the graph’s nodes into two sets. Its size is defined
as the number of graph edges connecting nodes belonging to
different sets. The Max-Cut problem is identifying a cut with
the largest size out of all possible cuts.
Max-Cut has emerged as a popular benchmark for quantum
optimization [12, 25–27] for two reasons: (1) it is among the
most challenging combinatorial optimization tasks, even to
obtain an approximate solution, i.e., APX-Hard [ 13, 28], (2)
as an unconstrained discrete optimization task, it has a natural
encoding as a Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization
(QUBO) [29, 30] or an Ising model [5, 31], ideally fitting cur-
rent quantum optimization algorithms (QAOA, QA). Although
Max-Cut provides a reasonable first step for benchmarking
current methods, testing more complex optimization tasks, in-
cluding problems with constraints, will be important in future
work to demonstrate that quantum-accelerated optimization
can impact a broad range of optimization applications.
1. Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm
The Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm [6] is
arguably the leading candidate for solving combinatorial op-
timization problems using gate model quantum processors.
QAOA belongs to the class of Variational Quantum Algorithms
(VQA) [35] and is usually implemented iteratively wherein a
classical optimizer ‘trains’ a parameterized quantum circuit.
QAOA is a heuristic that attempts to solve combinatorial op-
timization problems such as QUBO problems. Specifically,
the problem is encoded in the form of a specified quadratic
function of binary variables, and the objective is to find an
assignment for those variables that minimizes the function.
At the core of QAOA is an ‘ansatz circuit’, a parameterized
quantum circuit. Measurements in the computational basis at
the end of the circuit correspond to sampling from a probability
distribution over possible answers to the problem. A classical
optimizer obtains parameter values with a significant proba-
bility of producing optimal or near-optimal solutions. Finally,
repeatedly measuring the circuit with the parameter values the
...
...
...
...
|+⟩
e−iγ1HP e−iβ1HM e−iγpHP e−iβpHM
|+⟩
...
...
|+⟩
1 p
FIG. 14: The QAOA circuit consists of p repeating parameterized
blocks. First, each qubit is acted upon with the Hadamard gate to
obtain the|+⟩ state. Each block further consists of a rotation involv-
ing the problem Hamiltonian HP, followed by a rotation involving
the mixer Hamiltonian HM. Finally, all qubits are measured on the
computational basis{|0⟩,|1⟩}.
optimizer determines provides approximate solutions to the
problem.
The problem is first codified as a Hamiltonian HP, such that
an optimal problem solution corresponds to a ground state(s) or
lowest energy eigenstate(s). For a given choice of the number
of ‘rounds’ denoted by p, the QAOA ansatz is given by
|β, γ⟩ = e−iβpHMe−iγpHP... e−iβ1HMe−iγ1HP|+⟩, (B1)
where HM = P
i Xi, is the so-called mixer Hamiltonian, and
|+⟩ =⊗iH|0⟩ is the equal superposition state. Here, X is the
Pauli X matrix, defined by X|0⟩ =|1⟩ and X|1⟩ =|0⟩. The
ansatz state is thus obtained by implementing repeating and
alternating rotations about HP and HM as shown in Figure 14.
The Max-Cut problem can be framed in terms of obtaining
the ground state of the Hamiltonian
HP =−1
2
X
⟨i, j⟩∈E
(1− ZiZ j), (B2)
where E denotes the set of (undirected) edges of the graph, and
Z is the Pauli-Z matrix satisfying Z|0⟩ =|0⟩ and Z|1⟩ =−|1⟩.
Each computational basis vector corresponds to a possible cut,
and its energy represents the negative of the cut size. Note
that the eigenvalues of HP are all nonnegative integers and
that Equation B2 corresponds to an Ising model with all the
coupling constants set to 1/2.
A quantity called the approximation ratio is usually com-
puted to characterize the quality of solutions. The approxima-
tion ratio r is defined as the ratio of the energy expectation
value Fβ,γ B⟨β, γ| HP|β, γ⟩, and the ground state energy value
Emin:
rβ,γ = Fβ,γ
Emin
=⟨β, γ| HP|β, γ⟩
Emin
. (B3)
Note that the numerator is less than or equal to zero, whereas
the denominator, which is the negative of the largest cut size,
is strictly negative. Consequently, 0≤ r≤ 1. The classical
optimizer routine aims to obtain optimal values of the angles β
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 26 =====

26
FIG. 15: Graph Instances Chosen for the Benchmark Implementations. For each problem size ranging from 4 to 16 in increments of 2, we
used both QAOA and QA to solve the MaxCut problem for one 3-regular graph with that number of nodes. (For QA, larger graphs up to 320
nodes were also generated). These graphs show one solution to the MaxCut problem using colored nodes and edges. Nodes with di fferent colors
belong to the two sets of the solution cut. The number of red edges connecting nodes from different sets is the MaxCut for that graph.
FIG. 16: Sample QAOA Ansatz Circuit Diagram. The quantum circuit shown here is the ansatz created for the MaxCut problem with 6
variables shown above, implemented using 2 rounds on 6 qubits. Each of the two sets of 9 parameterized RZZ gates maps the edges within the
graph to the circuit and represents the problem Hamiltonian. The two sets of parameterized RX gates represent the mixer Hamiltonian. This
circuit implements what is shown in Figure 14 for the specific graph used in the benchmark.
and γ, i.e., values corresponding to the highest approximation
ratio value. Fβ,γ, and hence rβ,γ cannot be computed exactly
and are instead approximated by measuring|β, γ⟩ many (say
M) times, or shots, in the computational basis at the end of the
circuit (see Figure 14). Specifically, Fβ,γ are approximated by
the empirical average of energy.
2. Quantum Annealing
With quantum annealing, an optimization problem is en-
coded into the machine, after which the solution is determined
through quantum adiabatic evolution to arrive at a near-optimal
final state. The algorithmic approach of quantum annealing
is to take advantage of the dynamic evolution of a quantum
system to transform an initial ground state (which is easy to
prepare) into the ground state of a target Hamiltonian, which
is unknown and difficult to compute by other means. At a high
level, the protocol strives to identify the low-energy states of a
user-specified HTarget model by conducting an analog interpo-
lation process of the following Hamiltonian:
H(s) = (1− s)HInit + (s)HTarget. (B4)
The interpolation process starts with s = 0 and in the ground
state of HInit. The annealing process involves a smooth inter-
polation of s from 0 to 1. For a su fficiently long annealing
time, the adiabatic theorem demonstrates that a quantum sys-
tem remains at the minimal eigenvector of the interpolating
Hamiltonian, H(s) [94–96], and therefore arrives at minimum
energy states of HTarget at the end of the evolution.
Currently, available quantum annealing hardware focuses on
a particular case of Equation B4 that is limited to the Transverse
Field Ising model,
H(s) = A(s)

X
i
Xi
 + B(s)

X
i
hiZi +
X
i, j
Ji jZiZ j
. (B5)
Where Xi denotes the Pauli X operator applied to qubit i, Zi
denotes the Pauli Z operator applied to qubit i, and ZiZ j is the
tensor product of Z operators on qubits i and j. The two in-
terpolation functions A(s) and B(s) control a transition from a
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 27 =====

27
strong HInit and weak Htarget to a weak HInit and strong Htarget;
that is, A(0)≫ B(0) and A(1)≪ B(1). The hardware im-
plements a default annealing “path” through these functions,
which user parameters can modify. This way, this hardware,
and the QA algorithm can find ground and low-energy states of
a user-specified classical Ising model specified on the Z basis
via the parameters h and J, which encode the local fields and
coupling strengths, respectively. Note that the Max-Cut prob-
lem considered in this work is encoded in this model by setting
h = 0 and Ji j = +1 for each edge (i, j)∈ E that appears in the
given Max-Cut graph. If the Max-Cut graph cannot be encoded
naively in the quantum annealing hardware (i.e., the edge set
of the Max-Cut problem is not a subgraph of the ZiZ j terms
in the quantum annealing hardware), then a process known as
minor embedding [97] is used to map the Max-Cut problem
into a mathematically equivalent hardware-native problem.
It is interesting to note that the QAOA algorithm outlined
in section B 1 can be interpreted as a Trotterized version of
Equation B5 where the number of rounds p determines the
Trotter order. That is, the limit of a QAOA circuit can model
the smooth analog QA transition as p→∞ . The approxi-
mation ratio is computed for QA in the same way as QAOA
by transforming the samples obtained after annealing to an
equivalent distribution.
Appendix C: Problem and Implementation Details
To generate the results presented in this paper, we execute
the MaxCut benchmark on a single problem instance at each
problem size (or number of qubits). The instance is a ran-
domly chosen 3-regular graph at each size. A data set defining
each instance is contained in the QED-C benchmark reposi-
tory at https://github.com/SRI-International/QC-App-Oriented-
Benchmarks. The benchmark can be modified to use other
graphs if desired.
For reference, in Figure 15, we present some of the graphs
used for different size problems. Each graph shows one solu-
tion to the MaxCut problem using colored nodes and edges, as
described in the caption.
In Figure 16, we show the QAOA ansatz circuit generated
for the problem of size 6 (number of variables/qubits) used in
this benchmark. The caption describes how the components of
the circuit represent the Hamiltonian that defines the problem.
Below, we show the J matrix required to specify the 6-
variable Max-Cut problem for the quantum annealing hardware
according to Equation B5.
J =

0 −1 0 0 −1 −1
−1 0 −1 0 −1 0
0 −1 0 −1 0 −1
0 0 −1 0 −1 −1
−1 −1 0 −1 0 0
−1 0 0 0

(C1)
Appendix D: Analysis of Execution Time
a. Execution Time in QAOA The total time the QAOA
algorithm consumes includes both quantum and classical com-
ponents. There is a time associated with executing the quantum
ansatz circuit on the quantum processor. Additionally, time
is spent on a classical processor to perform the minimization
function that computes new parameters from measurements
obtained after each execution of the ansatz.
The time to execute the quantum portion of the algorithm
itself is broken down into several components. One is the
‘Quantum Execution Time’, defined as the time to execute N
shots of a quantum circuit within a quantum processor. Quan-
tum computer hardware providers typically report this time in
a result record and include the time required to initialize the
quantum system before execution and the delay between shots
[98] as shown in Equation D1.
tquantum = tinit + Nshots· (tshot + tdelay) (D1)
Using QAOA, a quantum circuit is executed repeatedly but
with varying parameters. The total time to execute the circuit,
the ‘Elapsed Quantum Execution Time’, includes the time
required to either compile the circuit or to apply parameters
before execution, and to validate and load the compiled circuit
for execution. Another highly variable component is the time
spent in a queue awaiting execution. The elapsed quantum
execution time is defined in Equation D2 and must be collected
as part of the benchmarking algorithm, as we did not find this
metric directly available in most systems.
telapsed_quantum = tqueue + tcompile + tload + tquantum (D2)
The sum of the quantum and elapsed quantum times for all
iterations of the QAOA algorithm, the ‘Cumulative Quantum
Execution Time’ and ‘Cumulative Elapsed Quantum Execution
Time’ respectively, are defined in Equation D3 and D4. The
financial cost of quantum computation is often tied to the
cumulative quantum execution time in many hardware systems.
The elapsed time for each iteration depends on the execution
parameters and may be influenced by the system’s ability to
support parameterized execution or the inclusion of hidden
classical post-processing time, such as error mitigation.
tcum_quantum =
NiterX
iter=1
tquantum(iter) (D3)
tcum_elapsed_quantum =
NiterX
iter=1
telapsed_quantum(iter) (D4)
‘Classical Execution Time’ for QAOA is the sum of the time
needed to create the ansatz with specific parameters and the
time used by the minimizer to process measurement results
and generate new parameters during a particular iteration iter,
as in Equation D5. The ‘Cumulative Classical Execution Time’
is the sum of the classical execution times for all iterations
as in Equation D6. For small problems, this time is typically
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 28 =====

28
insignificant but can increase with problem size and rounds.
It may also be impacted by the system’s ability to support
parameterized execution and reduce creation time.
tclassical = tcreate + toptimize (D5)
tcum_classical =
NiterX
iter=1
tclassical(iter) (D6)
The total execution time for QAOA is the sum of the cumu-
lative elapsed quantum time tcum_elapsed_quantum, and classical
compute time tcum_classical. Variability due to different process-
ing options or choice of classical optimizer can result in widely
differing result quality and execution times.
b. Execution time in QA For QA, the ‘Quantum Exe-
cution Time’ is defined as the time the quantum processing
unit (QPU) takes to execute N reads (samples) using a spec-
ified anneal time. This time is reported by the hardware as
‘qpu_access_time’ and includes ‘qpu_programming_time’ of
~ 16ms, and ‘qpu_sampling_time’, which is ‘anneal_time’ plus
‘readout_time’ (~ 0.25ms), multiplied by the number of reads.
Quantum execution time is defined in Equation D7.
tquantum = tqpu_access = tqpu_programming + tqpu_sampling (D7)
The ‘Elapsed Quantum Execution Time’ includes the time
required to issue the sample command to the (remote) backend
hardware system, wait for it to complete, and receive a fully
resolved sample set. It is defined in Equation D8. It includes
the quantum execution time, along with the time for computing
a minor embedding of the input to match the specific qubit
connection structure inside the QPU, and the time to resolve
solutions by mapping them back to the original (unembedded)
problem. The embedding cost is measured once for each an-
nealing time we test, which is not always necessary in practice
because embeddings can be reused.
telapsed_quantum = tqueue + tembed + tsample + tquantum + tresolve (D8)
For QA, the cumulative times reported in Figure 2 reflect
measurements of tquantum for increasing anneal times, as spec-
ified on line 6 of the benchmarking code. The telapsed_quantum
metric includes all the time needed to perform the annealing
operation and obtain a final sample set. This is comparable
to the cumulative times in QAOA. To illustrate the difference
between the two, we visualize the data in a slightly different
style. Each bar represents a di fferent anneal time and has a
slight vertical offset from the one before it to convey that it
represents the time starting at 0. See section V C for a presen-
tation of these metrics collected from execution on quantum
annealing hardware.
Appendix E: Result Quality and Hyper-Parameters
The performance of an optimization algorithm is often stud-
ied in terms of the trade-off between the quality of the obtained
result and the resources required to achieve it. In many real-
world applications, a high-quality result is required in a limited
time. It is desirable to predict whether obtaining a solution
with acceptable quality within the available time budget and
to determine the parameter values that result in high-quality
outputs is possible.
However, many options (or “hyper-parameters”) can be used
to control the execution of QAOA, and conclusions must not
be drawn from just one set of results obtained with limited ex-
ploration. While various hyper-parameters, such as the number
of shots, choice of the classical optimizer, number of iterations,
and rounds, affect result quality, we focus on the effects of val-
ues of initial angles on the performance in this section. We end
this section by discussing a parameter tuning strategy to help
identify good hyper-parameters for QAOA execution. (Similar
strategies can be developed for QA but are not discussed here.)
While this section refers to QAOA in the context of the Max-
Cut problem, most of the conclusions hold more generally for
QAOA. Throughout this section, we use the terms cut size and
energy interchangeably, where energy refers to the eigenvalues
of the Hamiltonian in Equation B2.
1. Initial Angles and Restarts
While several hyper-parameters, such as rounds, shots, num-
ber of optimizer iterations, etc., affect the ability of the iterative
QAOA execution to obtain a high-quality output, perhaps the
most critical and non-trivial choice is that of the initial values
of the angles.
The classical optimization routine faces several challenges.
Finding the optimal angles for QAOA has been shown to be an
NP-HARD problem [99]. Additionally, the landscape of the
objective function suffers from ‘barren plateaus’, a condition
where the gradient of the objective function is close to zero,
hindering training of the angles [ 100]. Barren plateaus can
also be exacerbated by the choice of objective function [101],
noise in quantum hardware [102], or large entanglement in the
ansatz [103].
A consequence of these challenges is that the choice of
the initial angles (i.e., β and γ) can substantially a ffect the
optimizer’s ability to reach the optimal value of the objective
function. For example, Figure 17a shows the trajectories of the
angles probed by the optimizer for two randomly chosen initial
angles. The distribution of the cut sizes obtained at the end of
30 optimizer iterations is substantially different, as shown in
Figure 17c. While one choice results in an output practically
indistinguishable from a random sampling of bitstrings, the
other results in a high-quality distribution of cuts. We also plot
a histogram of the approximation ratios in Figure 17b from
100 random initializations.
These issues have spurred substantial research to address
and overcome these challenges. Although many proposals
have been put forth, keeping in mind our objective of bench-
marking the performance of quantum solutions available to end
users, we focus on implementing the most basic approach for
mitigating some of these effects. Specifically, we implement
multiple ‘restarts’, i.e., we run QAOA multiple times using
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 29 =====

29
0 /2
0
/2
3 /2
2
Nodes=4, Rounds=1 parameter sweep
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Approximation Ratio
(a)
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Approximation Ratio
0
5
10
15
20Counts
Histogram of Approximation Ratios
Device=qasm_simulator  Sep 09, 2022 22:49:48 UTC
shots=5000, width=12, degree=3, restarts=100 (b)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Cut Size
Max Cut Size
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20Fraction of T otal Counts
Random Sampling
Initial Condition 1
Initial Condition 2
Empirical Distribution of cut sizes
Device=qasm_simulator  Sep 09, 2022 22:49:44 UTC
shots=5000, width=12, degree=3, restarts=100 (c)
FIG. 17: Values of Initial Angles Affect Result Quality. (a) Parameter trajectories and approximation ratio landscape: The COBYLA
optimizer navigates the parameter space differently depending on the initial parameter values. The trajectory taken for two randomly chosen
initial angle values (labeled s1 and s2) is shown in the background of the approximation ratio landscape, obtained from a state-vector simulation.
The parameters at the end of the 30 iterations are labeled f 1 and f 2, respectively. (b) Histogram of approximation ratios obtained at the
end of 30 COBYLA iterations from QAOA simulations for 100 restarts succinctly shows the variability associated with initial conditions.
Although most restarts result in an approximation ratio between 0.75 and 0.85, some result in a substantially lower approximation ratio. (c) The
distribution of cut sizes at the end of 30 iterations for two initial conditions is substantially different, with initial condition 2 almost overlapping
with a random sampling of bit-strings, while initial condition 1 results in a relatively high approximation ratio of≈ 0.83.
4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Problem Size (# of Variables)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40Optimality Gap (%)
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator_mc10  Jan 07, 2023 21:00:20 UTC
shots=1000, rounds=2, degree=3, restarts=10, fixed_angles=False, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
Quartiles
FIG. 18: Optimality Gap with Multiple Restarts. We show the
results obtained when executing the Max-Cut benchmark 10 times at
each problem size. The result shown for each problem size represents
the ‘best’ result obtained for that problem size across all 10 restarts,
defined as the result showing the highest approximation ratio.
random angles as initial angles for the optimizer and report the
output corresponding to the best restart.
To this end, our benchmarking framework allows users to
specify the number of restarts through a parameter called
max_circuits. This parameter is set to 1, and all the ini-
tialβ andγ angles are set to 1. Thus, all the results in section V
use these starting angles. For restarts > 1, for each problem
size, the output corresponding to the best restart is displayed
in the plots. Figure 18 shows the output corresponding to
10 restarts for the same parameters as Figure 5. The quality
of the results is noticeably better for smaller problem sizes.
The user can also specify initial angles manually using the
thetas_array parameter.
2. Fixed Angle Conjecture
Although multiple initializations or restarts mitigate some
of the difficulties faced by the optimizer, the cost of implement-
ing the optimizer routine multiple times can be substantial,
requiring many-fold quantum) processing unit access time.
A recent study [104] proposes an optimization-free QAOA
implementation, executing the ansatz for each problem only
once using the so-called ‘fixed angles’. The authors show
that at these angles, the approximation ratio is higher than
the threshold for every problem instance for 3-regular graphs.
Although these angles are not the global maxima of the ap-
proximation ratio landscape, they guarantee close to optimal
performance without performing the costly optimizer loop. For
example, Figure 19 shows that the optimality gap for all prob-
lem sizes (except 4) with fixed angles is practically the same
as in Figure 18, which required 10 restarts with 30 optimizer
iterations each. This corresponds to a reduction in QPU access
time by a factor of≈300 while yielding similar quality results.
Hence, the benchmark framework includes a provision for
choosing the initial angles to be the fixed angles by setting the
use_fixed_angles flag to True. The optimizer iterations
can be set simultaneously to 1 to avoid using the optimizer
routine.
In Figure 20, we present results from a test run using this
benchmark feature to explore ‘parameter concentration’ [105].
For problem sizes ranging from 4 to 20 qubits on 3-regular
graphs, 100 random initial angles were tested using the Max-
Cut benchmark, with 30 optimizer iterations each. This plot
shows theγ values obtained as final values by the optimizer and
the corresponding approximation ratios. The angles obtained
by the optimizer are shown to cluster around four values, most
of which match the values proposed in [104]. The choice of
initial angles influences the algorithm’s outcome, and a strategy
for selecting these angles is critical for optimal performance.
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 30 =====

30
4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Problem Size (# of Variables)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40Optimality Gap (%)
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Qiskit
Device=qasm_simulator_fa_1  Jan 07, 2023 20:35:15 UTC
shots=1000, rounds=2, degree=3, restarts=1, fixed_angles=True, 
Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
Quartiles
FIG. 19: Optimization-free QAOA Implementation using Fixed
Angles. To avoid restarts and the costly optimization loop, one may
use the ‘fixed angles‘ guaranteed to produce a good quality out-
put [104]. Here is the optimality gap using fixed angles for rounds=2
without implementing the minimizer routine.
0
2
3
2
4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90Energy Approximation Ratio
Benchmark Results - MaxCut (2) - Qiskit
rounds=1, Objective Function=Approximation Ratio
1
FIG. 20: Angles cluster around certain values. For 3-regular graphs
with sizes ranging from 4 qubits to 20 qubits, we choose 100 random
initial angles and run 30 (COBYLA) optimizer iterations each. The
final angles obtained by the optimizer cluster around four values. The
γ values are shown here, along with the corresponding approximation
ratios.
3. Parameter Selection Strategy
Previously, we showed how the choice of initial angles and
the number of rounds, shots, and restarts could affect the perfor-
mance of the QAOA implementation. In addition, the perfor-
mance could vary from one problem instance to another. These
considerations raise the following question: For previously un-
seen problem instances, can we predict parameter values that
are likely to result in the best performance? Specifically, given
a notion of resource (e.g., QPU access time) and a metric for
result quality (e.g., approximation ratio), what parameter val-
ues should be used to get optimal performance given a resource
budget?
With that goal in mind, a benchmarking framework is be-
ing developed for parameterized stochastic optimization algo-
102 103 104 105 106 107
Resource=COBYLA Iterations × Shots × Restarts
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85Approximation Ratio
VirtualBest
Recommended Averaged Parameters
FIG. 21: Solution Quality vs. Total Resource Utilization: The vir-
tual best provides a bound on the best performance attainable by any
parameter strategy. Here are the performance profiles of the virtual
best, along with the performance obtained from the parameters recom-
mended by the stochastic-benchmarking framework [107]. The red
dashed vertical line corresponds to the resource value used throughout
the hardware section (30 iterations, 1000 shots, 1 restart). The shaded
area highlights the regime, after which the approximation ratio drops
with increasing resources.
rithms such as QAOA and quantum annealing in a parallel
effort [106]. Although this framework [107] applies to other
algorithms, we apply it to the QAOA simulations using results
obtained from the QED-C benchmarking framework. This
framework generates parameter recommendations over a grid
of resource values and also plots the corresponding perfor-
mance compared to the best performance seen in the data.
The input to the framework consists of performance data
obtained empirically by implementing an algorithm on various
problem instances. The data includes the quality of the result,
which we call the performance metric, corresponding to many
algorithm executions over a range of parameter value settings.
A function is provided to compute the resources expended for
each execution.
The framework splits the problem instances into testing and
training sets. A statistical analysis of the training set data is
then used to identify the parameter values likely to lead to
high performance when applied to the test set. On the other
hand, for each instance in the test set, parameter values as a
function of the resource corresponding to the highest result
quality found so far are identified from the available data for all
resource grid values. These are summarized in a curve denoted
as ‘virtual best’.
Thus, the parameter values corresponding to the virtual best
simulate knowing ahead of time for each instance what the
best parameters would be for any resource value. The virtual
best provides a bound on the performance that any parameter-
setting strategy using the data provided for the analysis can
provide. Thus, the recommended and virtual best parameters
are plotted together in a ‘strategy plot’. The virtual best perfor-
mance is plotted in a separate plot along with the performance
obtained on the test set using the recommended parameters.
We now present an analysis of QAOA using this framework.
Figure 21 shows the obtained performance profile, while Fig-
ure 22 shows the strategy plots generated by the framework,
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024

===== PAGE 31 =====

31
102 103 104 105 106 1070
10
20
30COBYLA Iterations
102 103 104 105 106 107
102
103
Shots
102 103 104 105 106 107
Resource=COBYLA Iterations × Shots × Restarts
100
101
102
Restarts
 0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
Approximation Ratio
VirtualBest Recommended Averaged Parameter
FIG. 22: Strategy Plots: For each resource value, the framework
recommends values for minimizer iterations, shots, and the number
of restarts likely to lead to the best performance. For comparison,
the virtual best parameters are also plotted as colored curves, with
the colors indicating the corresponding approximation ratio. The red
dashed vertical line corresponds to the resource value used throughout
the hardware section (30 iterations, 1000 shots, 1 restart). The shaded
area highlights the regime, after which the approximation ratio drops
with increasing resources.
using an 80%-20% train/test instances split. The QAOA algo-
rithm uses noiseless simulations with two rounds for 50 distinct
3-regular graphs of size 12. We implemented runs correspond-
ing to a range of values for restarts [1,. . . ,100], number of
classical optimizer (COBYLA) iterations [1,. . . ,30], and shots
[50,. . . ,5000]. We capture the number of times the processing
unit was accessed by defining the resource as the product of
these parameters.
Figure 21 can be used to determine the relative performance
of the recommended parameter values with respect to the op-
timistic bound given by the virtual best. In this example, we
observe that both lines almost overlap, showing that good pa-
rameter values are shared across the training (recommended
parameter values) and testing (virtual best parameter values)
instances. In particular, these results show that, with increasing
access to the processing unit, the quality of the response in-
creases, as measured by the approximation ratio up to a certain
point. The shaded area in this figure shows a regime of the
resource quantity in which the performance metric decreases
with increasing resources. This is counterintuitive and reveals
that, given the data used to generate this analysis, the best
parameter values are given with the COBYLA iterations set to
30 and 100 restarts and only 50 shots. Combinations of param-
eter values that yield larger resource usage can diminish the
approximation ratio. This observation suggests that increasing
the number of shots deteriorates the performance if allowed
more processing unit access.
Moreover, it highlights that the number of classical min-
imizer iterations should be increased before the number of
restarts when more resources become available, always aiming
to keep the number of shots small. The dashed red line shows
the equivalent resource usage of the simulations in the remain-
ing of section E. Notice how the recommended parameter
values, as seen in Figure 22, i.e., 27 COBYLA iterations, 20
restarts, and 50 shots, are not the same as the ones used in the
other hardware demonstrations, i.e., 30 COBYLA iterations,
1 restart, and 1000 shots. Using this analysis and specifying
a performance metric and a resource function, empirical data
can be used to inform parameter setting values. Moreover,
these results can also inform about the instances themselves.
In this example, the problem instances are relatively small,
i.e., 12 node graphs with a solution space of size 212 = 4096.
When solving the problem with QAOA, sampling the output
distributions extensively with many shots does not improve
the approximation ratio as much as reinitializing the problem
(restarts) or allowing more classical optimization iterations.
These parameter-setting strategy analyses provide practical
recommendations for using algorithms like the one discussed
in this manuscript.
Optimization Applications as Quantum Performance Benchmarks February 5, 2024
