===== PAGE 1 =====

ARTICLE OPEN
Space-efﬁcient binary optimization for variational quantum
computing
Adam Glos 1 ✉, Aleksandra Krawiec 1 and Zoltán Zimborás 2,3
In the era of Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) computers it is crucial to design quantum algorithms which do not require
many qubits or deep circuits. Unfortunately, most of the well-known quantum algorithms are too demanding to be run on currently
available quantum devices. Moreover, even the state-of-the-art algorithms developed for the NISQ era often suffer from high space
complexity requirements for particular problem classes. In this paper, we show that it is possible to greatly reduce the number of
qubits needed for the Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP), a paradigmatic optimization task, at the cost of having deeper variational
circuits. While the focus is on this particular problem, we claim that the approach can be generalized for other problems where the
standard bit-encoding is highly inef ﬁcient. Finally, we also propose encoding schemes which smoothly interpolate between the
qubit-efﬁcient and the circuit depth-ef ﬁcient models. All the proposed encodings have the same volume up to polylogarithmic
factors and remain ef ﬁcient to implement within the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm framework.
npj Quantum Information            (2022) 8:39 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41534-022-00546-y
INTRODUCTION
During the past few decades, a wealth of quantum algorithms
have been designed for various problems, many of which offered
a speedup over their classical equivalents
1–4. The theoretical
developments have also been complemented by progress on the
experimental side. Indeed, the demonstration of quantum
supremacy by Google
5 indicates that in the near future useful
quantum technology may be available. However, current Noisy
Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) devices are too small and too
noisy to implement complicated algorithms like Shor ’s factoriza-
tion algorithm2 or Grover-search-based optimizers 6,7. This resulted
in a new ﬁeld of quantum computation that focuses on designing
new algorithms requiring signi ﬁcantly less noisy qubits.
Optimization is a problem that seems to be particularly
suitable for current NISQ devices. In particular, the Variational
Quantum Eigensolver (VQE) 8–10 seems to be the state-of-the-art
algorithm for solving molecul e Hamiltonians. Although it can
solve optimization problems de ﬁned over discrete spaces, so-
called combinatorial optimization problems, quantum annealing
and Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA)
11
a r ec o n s i d e r e dt ob em o r es u i t a b l e .
For all of these algorithms, the original combinatorial optimiza-
tion problem has to be transformed into the Ising model. Typically,
one starts with a high-level description, like the Max-Cut problem,
where nodes in the graph G = (V, E) have to be colored either red
or black, so that certain function is minimized. Then, one has to
transform it to a pseudo-Boolean polynomial P
fu;vg2E ðbu /C0 bv Þ2.
Each binary variable (bit) bv denotes the color of the node v in the
graph. For example we can choose bv = 1 for red color, and bv = 0
for black color. For quantum algorithms it is convenient to change
the representation into Ising model via transformation b
v ← (1 −
Zv)/2. Here Zv is a Pauli operator acting on a qubit corresponding
to the node v. By transforming the original objective function into
Hamiltonian, we also change the domain of the problem into the
space of quantum states.
Quantum optimization algorithms differ in the way how they
solve the problem. Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE) is a
heuristic algorithm in which the quantum circuit is optimized
using classical procedure. More precisely, we are given an ansatz
U(θ)w h i c h ,a f t e r ﬁxing the parameter θ,p r o d u c e sas t a t e
θji ¼Q
k/C0 1
i¼0 Ui ðθi Þ 0ji .T h ev e c t o r θ is optimized using classical
optimization procedure like g radient descent, simultaneous
perturbation stochastic approximation (SPSA), and other 12,13,
so that θji will be localized at high-quality answer. Due to its
generality, VQE is commonly used for molecule Hamiltonians,
however its usability to the classical optimization problems may
be limited.
Quantum annealing theoretically can also be applied for
chemistry Hamiltonians, however current machines restrict their
usability to combinatorial optimization problems. The algorithm
turns the ground state of initial Hamiltonian H
mix = ∑iXi into a
ground state of objective Hamiltonian H through adiabatic
evolution g(t)Hmix + (1 − g(t))H. Adiabatic theorem provides a
good premise for high-quality solutions of the problem. Further-
more, while available D-Wave ’s annealers have thousands of
qubits, the topology restrictions may limit the size of tractable
problems to cases solvable by classical procedures
14,15.
Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) is a
mixture of the methods described above 11. While quantum
annealing is a continuous process, QAOA interchangeably applies
both Hmix and H for some time. The evolution time is a parameter
of the evolution, and as it was in the case of VQE, they are
adjusted by external classical procedure. Here the resulting state
takes the form
θji ¼
Y
r/C0 1
i¼0
expð/C0 iθmix;iHmixÞ expð/C0 iθobj;iHÞþji ; (1)
where r is the number of levels. The algorithm can be
implemented as long as both mixing and objective Hamiltonians
can be implemented, which in particular allows for applying it to
combinatorial problems. Many studies have been performed to
1Institute of Theoretical and Applied Informatics, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Ba łtycka 5, 44-100 Gliwice, Poland. 2Wigner Research Centre for Physics, H-1525, P.O.Box 49,
Budapest, Hungary. 3BME-MTA Lendület Quantum Information Theory Research Group, Budapest, Hungary. ✉email: aglos@iitis.pl
www.nature.com/npjqi
Published in partnership with The University of New South Wales
1234567890():,;

===== PAGE 2 =====

characterize properties of QAOA algorithms, including both
rigorous proofs of computational power and reachability proper-
ties16–19 as well as characterization through heuristics and
numerical experiments and extensions of the algorithm 20–24.
While the proposed quantum algorithms can theoretically
solve arbitrary combinatorial optimization problems, not all
pseudo-Boolean polynomials c an be natively considered for
current quantum devices. A general pseudo-Boolean polynomial
takes the form
HðbÞ¼
X
I/C18f 0; ¼ ;n/C0 1g
αI
Y
i2I
bi ;
where αI 2 R deﬁnes the optimization problem. The problem of
ﬁnding optimum of such function is called Higher-Order Binary
Optimization (HOBO). An order of such Hamiltonian is a maximum
size of S for which αS is nonzero. Current D-Wave machines are
restricted to polynomials of order 2, hence if one would like to
solve Hamiltonians of higher order, ﬁrst a quadratization
procedure has to be applied, in general at cost of extra qubits 25.
Note that optimization of quadratic polynomials, Quadratic
Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO) is NP-complete, hence
it encapsulates most of the relevant problems.
The objective Hamiltonian for Max-Cut requires n qubits for
graph of order n. Hence it can encode 2
n solutions, which is equal
to the number of all possible colorings. However, this is not the
case in general. For example for Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP)
over N cities, the QUBO requires N2 bits26. However, to store N!
permutations only dlog2ðN!Þe /C25 N log N bits are needed. We
consider this as a waste of computational resources. Unfortu-
nately, in general polynomials with optimal number of qubits have
order larger than two, thus we are actually dealing with higher-
order binary optimization, which is currently not possible using
D-Wave machines.
The idea of using higher-order terms is not new. In fact, in the
original work of Farhi et al.
11, the authors have not restricted the
model to two-local model. Furthermore, Hamiltonian of order 4
was used for variational quantum factoring
27, while Hamiltonian
of order l was constructed for Max- l-SAT problem 20. Since the
terms of arbitrary order can be implemented ef ﬁciently, QAOA for
the problem can reduce the number of required logical qubits. In
general, if objective polynomial is of constant order α, then the
circuit of depth O
/C16/C16n
α
/C17
log α
/C17
implements the objective Hamil-
tonian exactly. While the number may be large, it is still
polynomial, which makes the implementation tractable. However,
even for slowly growing α (say Oðlog nÞ), in general the number of
terms grows exponentially, which could be the case for l → ∞ in
Max-l-SAT. Note that even an encoding that requires only
logarithmic number of qubits has been introduced 28, however,
the minimizer of this encoding does not necessarily map to the
minimizer of the original problem.
Furthermore, when dealing with unbounded order, one has
to be careful when transforming QUBO into the Ising model.
Let us consider a polynomial 2
nQn/C0 1
i¼0 bi . Default transformation
bi ← (1 − Zi)/2 will produce Hamiltonian P
I⊆{0, … , n−1}(−1)∣I∣Q
i2I Zi ,
which consists of 2 n terms29. For this example, one can easily
ﬁnd a better Hamiltonian /C0 Pn/C0 1
i¼0 Zi , that shares the same global
minimizer, however, in general ﬁnding such a transformation
requires a higher-level understanding of the problem. Note that
this is not an issue for constant-order polynomials, as the number
of terms is guaranteed to be polynomial even in the worst case
scenario.
Despite the potential issues coming from utilizing unbounded-
order polynomials, we present a polynomial (encoding) for TSP
problem with unbounded order, which can be ef ﬁciently
implemented using approximately optimal number of qubits.
Furthermore, our model requires fewer measurements for
estimating energy. We also developed a transition encoding,
where one can adjust the improvement in the required number of
qubits and circuit ’s depth. Finally, QAOA optimizes our encoding
with similar or better ef ﬁciency compared to the state-of-the-art
QUBO encoding of TSP.
Current state-of-the-art encoding of TSP problem can be found
in the paper by Lucas
26. Let us consider the Traveling Salesman
Problem (TSP) over N cities. Let W be a cost matrix, and bti be a
binary variable such that bti = 1 iff the i-th city is visited at time t.
The QUBO encoding takes the form 26
HQUBOðbÞ¼ A1
PN/C0 1
t¼0
1 /C0 PN/C0 1
i¼0
bti
/C18/C19 2
þ A2
PN/C0 1
i¼0
1 /C0 PN/C0 1
t¼0
bti
/C18/C19 2
þ BPN/C0 1
i;j¼0
i≠j
Wij
PN/C0 1
t¼0
bti btþ1;j :
Here A1; A2 >B maxi≠j Wij are parameters that have to be adjusted
during the optimization. We also assume N → 0 simpli ﬁcation for
the indices. Note that any route can be represented in N different
ways, depending on which city is visited at time t = 0. Such
redundancy can be solved by ﬁxing that the ﬁrst city should be
visited at time t = 0. Thanks to that, n = (N−1)2 (qu)bits in total are
required.
In the scope of this paper we will take advantage of various
quality measures of encodings. First, since the Hamiltonian has to
be implemented directly, we prefer encodings with possibly small
depth. In this manner, QUBO can be simulated with a circuit of
depth OðnÞ using round-robin scheduling, see Fig. 2.
However, QUBO encoding for TSP is inef ﬁcient in the number
of qubits. Using Stirling formula one can show that dlogðN!Þe ¼
N logðNÞ/C0 N logðeÞþ ΘðlogðNÞÞ qubits are suf ﬁcient to encode
all possible routes, which is signi ﬁcantly smaller than N2.N o t e
that the number of qubits also has an impact on the volume
of the circuit, de ﬁned as a product of the number of qubits and
the circuit ’sd e p t h .I nc a s eo ft h i se n c o d i n g ,t h ev o l u m ei so f
order OðN3Þ.
In the paper we also consider the required number of measure-
ments to estimate the energy within constant additive error. Instead
of estimating each term of the Hamiltonian independently, which has
to be done for VQE, we consider the measurement ’so u t p u ta sa
single sample. This way, using Hoeffding’s theorem, QUBO encoding
requires OðN
3Þ measurements.
Finally, we would also like to mention some other approaches of
reducing the number of qubits required for optimization problems.
The authors of 30 proposed a similar approach of changing the
numeric system, however, they have not considered its applica-
tions to combinatorial problems, and particularly focused on
qudits. The authors of Fuchs et al.
31 independently considered
Max-K-Cut, which is adealing with unbounded order, one has to be
generalization of Max-Cut with K-partitions of the graph. They
obtained a similar reduction from NK to /C24 N log K qubits, however,
they did not provide a transition model which provides a trade-off
between the circuit depth and the required number of qubits.
Finally, there are known QAOA versions in which one reduces the
size of infeasible space for TSP problems based on the general-
ization of QAOA
20, however, they still require N2 number of qubits,
which is the same as for the state-of-the-art encoding 32.
RESULTS
Preliminaries
Travelling Salesman Problem is natively de ﬁned over the
permutations of {0, … , N − 1}. A simple encoding can be de ﬁned
as follows. We make a partition of all bits into N collections b
t,
where each collection encodes a city visited in a particular time.
Then, for each collection we choose a number encoding that
represents the city.
A. Glos et al.
2
npj Quantum Information (2022)    39 Published in partnership with The University of New South Wales
1234567890():,;

===== PAGE 3 =====

QUBO is an example of such an encoding, where each city is
represented by an one-hot vector, see Fig. 1. Instead, each city can
be encoded as a number using binary numbering system. Using
binary numbering system is a state-of-the-art way to encode
inequalities
26, however, it is new in the context of encoding
elements of a feasible space.
The Hamiltonian takes the form
HðbÞ¼ A1
PN/C0 1
t¼0
Hvalidðbt Þþ A2
PN/C0 1
t¼0
PN/C0 1
t0 ¼tþ1
H≠ðbt ; bt0 Þ
þ BPN/C0 1
i;j¼0
i≠j
Wij
PN/C0 1
t¼0
Hδðbt ; iÞHδðbtþ1; jÞ:
(2)
Hamiltonian Hvalid checks whether a vector of bits bt encodes a
valid city. For example, for QUBO it checks whether exactly one bit
is equal to 1.
Hamiltonian H
≠ veriﬁes whether two collections encode the
same city. Note that QUBO encoding falls into this representation
by choosing
HQUBO
≠ ðbt ; bt0 Þ¼ 2PN/C0 1
i¼0
bti bt0 i /C0 1
N/C0 1
PN/C0 1
i¼0
bti þPN/C0 1
i¼0
bt0 i þ 2
/C18/C19
Hamiltonian Hδ plays a similar role as H≠.I ft h ei n p u t s
are different, then both Hδ and H≠ give zeros. If the inputs are
the same, then the outputs are nonzero and moreover we
expect that the Hamiltonian Hδ o u t p u t s1 .T h i si si no r d e rt o
preserve the costs of routes. In case of QUBO we took Hδ(bt, i) =
bti. Note that in particular, Hδ = H≠ may be a good choice,
however, later we will show that choosing different H≠ may be
beneﬁcial.
Simple HOBO encoding
The simplest encoding is the one in which each collection bt
encodes a city in a bin ary system, see Fig. 1. In this case, for each
time we need K :¼d log Ne qubits. In total we need /C24 N logðNÞ
qubits, which match the lower bound. Moreover, we have to
design H
valid in such a way that bt represents the number at
most N − 1.
Following Eq. ( 2), it is easy to note that HOBO de ﬁned in a way
described above, is of polynomial size. Note that the sum of
Hamiltonians H≠ produces at most
/C16N
2
/C17
22K elements.
Furthermore, the terms introduced by HHOBO
valid and HHOBO
δ are
already present in HHOBO
≠ . Hence in total, we have OðN4Þ terms,
which implies the polynomial size and depth, and thus volume.
Let us now present an exemplary encoding. Suppose ~bK/C0 1 ¼ ~b0
is a binary representation of N − 1. Suppose k0 ∈ K0 are such
indices that ~bk0 ¼ 0. Then one can show that
HHOBO
valid ðbt Þ :¼
X
k0 2K0
bt;k0
YK/C0 1
k¼k0 þ1
1 /C0ð bt;k /C0 ~bk Þ
2/C16/C17
validates whether the encoding number is at most N − 1. A
detailed proof can be found in Supplementary Methods, here let
us consider an example. Suppose N − 1 = 1001012. All the
numbers larger than N − 1 are of the form 11???? 2, 101??? 2 or
10011?2, where ‘?’ denotes an arbitrary bit value. The polynomial
bt5bt4 þ bt5ð1 /C0 bt4Þbt3 þ bt5ð1 /C0 bt4Þð1 /C0 bt3Þbt2bt1 (3)
punishes all these forms. At the same time, one can verify that
numbers smaller than N − 1 are not punished by the Hamiltonian.
Here, we will consider HHOBO
≠ /C17 HHOBO
δ , hence it is enough to
deﬁne the latter only. Hamiltonian HHOBO
δ can be de ﬁned as
HHOBO
δ ðb; b0Þ :¼
YK/C0 1
k¼0
1 /C0ð bk /C0 b0
k Þ2/C16/C17
:
Note that if b0 is a ﬁxed number like it is in the case of objective
function implementation in Eq. ( 2), then we simply take
consecutive bits from binary representation. After transforming
the polynomial above into Ising model, one can see that
ðb
k /C0 b0
k Þ2 ¼ 1
4 ðZ0
k /C0 Zk Þ2 ¼ 1
2 ð1 /C0 Z0
k Zk Þ. This means that all the
Pauli terms are of the form where spins are in pairs with the same
index k. This allows reducing the initial estimate OðN
4Þ of number
of Pauli terms into OðN3Þ.
Let us estimate the cost of this encoding. As it was previously
stated, the number of factors is of order OðN3Þ. Using round-robin
technique for distributing gates and Gray code for ordering the
applications of Pauli ZZ… Z operators, see Figs. 2 and 3, one can
show that the depth of the circuit is OðN
2Þ, which gives us the
volume OðN3 logðNÞÞ, which is almost the same as it was for
QUBO. Note that the Gray code scheduling requires additional
⌊N/2⌋ qubits, which does not change the ﬁnal result. Finally, in
order to achieve a similar quality of energy measurements, we
need OðN
2Þ measurements.
Fig. 1 Visualization of QUBO encoding and encodings introduced in the paper for TSP problem. a exemplary solution for TSP problem. On
the right there are assignments of the exemplary solution using respectively b QUBO, c HOBO, d naïve mixed, and e mixed encodings.
A. Glos et al.
3
Published in partnership with The University of New South Wales npj Quantum Information (2022)    39 

===== PAGE 4 =====

One can expect that Higher-Order Binary Optimization may lead
to dif ﬁcult landscapes, harder to investigate for optimization
algorithm. We have investigated TSP encodings with W ≡ 0 and
random W matrices. The results are presented in Fig. 4. One can
see that with the same number of Hamiltonians applied, the
results are either similar or in favor for higher-order encodings.
Mixed QUBO-HOBO approach
While QUBO encoding requires signi ﬁcantly more qubits com-
pared to HOBO, the latter produces much deeper circuits. It is not
clear whether the number of qubits or the depth of the circuit will
be more challenging, and in fact we claim that both may produce
signiﬁcant dif ﬁculties when designing quantum computers.
One can consider a simple mixing of the proposed QUBO and
HOBO approaches in the following way: let R ∈ {1, … , N − 1} be a
free parameter of our model. Exactly R of collections b
t will be
encoded as one-hot vectors (in QUBO ’s fashion), while the
remaining N − R collections will be encoded using the binary
representation, see Fig. 1d).
Unfortunately, this approach combines ﬂaws of both models
introduced before. For R = Ω(N), the mixed approach requires Θ
(N2) qubits. On the other hand, for R ¼O ðNÞ the depth of the
circuit is the same as in the HOBO approach due to numerous
HOBO-encoded b
t.
Instead, we propose another encoding. Suppose N = (2K − 1)L
for suitable integers K and L. Each bt consists of KL qubits of the
form btlk. The cities are encoded as follows. First K qubits ( ﬁrst
bunch) decodes numbers 0, … ,2 K − 2. The second bunch decodes
2K − 1, … ,2 ⋅ 2K − 3, and so on. Note that QUBO and HOBO
encodings introduced before are special instances with L = N and
L = 1 respectively.
We add the following assumptions, which also de ﬁne Hvalid. All
bits being zero is an invalid assignment, which is equivalent to ∑k,
lbtlk ≥ 1. This can be forced by using standard techniques for
transforming inequalities to QUBO 26. Secondly, if in some bunch
there are nonzero bits, then in all other bunches bits have to be
zeros. Note that this assumption is equivalent to the fact that for
all l
0 = 0, … , L − 1 we have that either P
k btl0 k is zero orP
l≠l0
P
k btlk is zero. The Hamiltonian HMIX
valid takes the form
HMIX
validðbt Þ :¼/C0 PL/C0 1
l¼0
PK/C0 1
k¼0
btlk þ 1 þ PdlogðKLÞe
i¼0
2i ξt;i
 ! 2
þ PL/C0 1
l¼0
PK/C0 1
k¼0
btlk
/C18/C19 PL/C0 1
l0 ¼0
l0 ≠l
PK/C0 1
k¼0
btl0 k
0
B@
1
CA:
Here ξi are additional bits for encoding the ﬁrst assumption. In
total, there will be additional N logðKLÞ/C20 N logðNÞ qubits.
Now let us de ﬁne HMIX
≠ Hamiltonian. Since due to HMIX
valid there
exist two indices l0; l0
0 such that btl0 and bt0 l0
0
are nonzero, we only
have to check for consecutive bunches l = 0, … , L − 1 if there
exists l such that bt,l are nonzero and identical. The Hamiltonian
HMIX
≠ takes the form
HMIX
≠ ðbt ; bt0 Þ :¼PL/C0 1
l¼0
PK/C0 1
k¼0
ðbtlk þ bt0 ;l;k Þ
/C18/C19 QK/C0 1
k¼0
1 /C0ð bt;l;k /C0 bt0 ;l;k Þ2
/C16/C17
:
Note that the ﬁrst factor checks whether the bunches are nonzero,
while the latter is the Kronecker delta implementation as before.
Fig. 2 Round-robin schedule for binary vectors b0, … , b4. A description of the schedule can be found in 40. We assumed that each bi is
deﬁned over 3 qubits. Each gate de ﬁned over a pair bi, bj is an implementation of the Hamiltonian de ﬁned over these variables.
Fig. 3 Decompositions of 3-local Pauli operator ZZZ and higher-local Ising model with and without ancilla. On the left, two
decompositions of expðitZ1Z2Z3Þ, a without auxiliary qubit 41 (p.30), and b with auxiliary qubit 42 (p.210). On the right, an example of
simplifying circuit for ∑I⊆{1, 2, 3}αI∏i∈IZi using Gray codes ordering for applications of ∏i∈IZi gates, c using Z operations only, and d with CNOTs
and single-qubit gates only. In all the ﬁgures blue gates are a k-local Z operations.
A. Glos et al.
4
npj Quantum Information (2022)    39 Published in partnership with The University of New South Wales

===== PAGE 5 =====

Finally, let us deﬁne HMIX
δ .L e t l : f0; ¼ ; N /C0 1g!f 0; ¼ ; L /C0 1g
be a function that outputs a bunch index denoting thei-th city. Then
it is enough to apply the Kronecker delta on lðiÞ-th bunch. Hence
HMIX
δ will take the form
HMIX
δ ðbt ; iÞ :¼
YK/C0 1
k¼0
1 /C0ð bt0 ;lðiÞ;k /C0 bi
k Þ
2/C16/C17
;
where bi
k is k-th bit of binary representation of i.
Let us now calculate the ef ﬁciency of the encoding. We will
consider only the scenario k ¼ α logðNÞ for α ∈ (0, 1). First we note
that L ¼ N
2K /C0 1 ¼ ΘðN1/C0 αÞ. For the proposed mixed encoding, we
need NKL þ N logðKLÞ¼ ΘðN2/C0 α logðNÞÞ qubits. Hamiltonian can
be encoded in a circuits of depth OðN1þαlog2ðNÞÞ. This ﬁnally
gives us the volume OðN3log3ðNÞÞ. All these parameters show a
perfect, up to poly-log factors, transition between HOBO and
QUBO approaches. Finally, to achieve constant error of energy
estimation, we require OðN3/C0 α log NÞ maxi≠j Wij runs of the circuit.
Optimal encoding
So far we assumed that all binary variables are split into collections
of binary variables, such that each collection de ﬁnes a particular
time point. We heavily used this assumption, so that the encoding
was particularly simple. Therefore, it was implementable on a
quantum computer, which is necessary for QAOA. Nevertheless,
dropping this assumption can save us from even more qubits.
Let H be a diagonal Hamiltonian. Then ψhj H ψji ¼P
b2f0;1gn Ebj bjψhi j 2,w h e r e Ei is the energy value corresponding
to the bit string i. Hence, the statistics from the measurements are
sufﬁcient to estimate the energy.
Suppose we are given a general combinatorial optimization
problem of function f : A! R, where A is a natural feasible
space for the problem. In the case of TSP, A would be a collection
of all permutations of some ﬁxed order. Let g : A!B/C18f 0; 1gn
be a bijection function where n ¼d logðjAjÞe. Let ~ginvðbÞ be an
extension of g−1 such that it maps some penalty energy
Epen> mina2A f ðaÞ, i.e. ginv ðbÞ¼ g/C0 1ðbÞδb2B þ Epenδb∉B . Then pro-
vided that ginv can be ef ﬁciently computed, we can use it to
estimate the expected energy directly from the measurement ’s
statistics. Since converting binary representation into numbers
takes negligible time, it is enough to provide a procedure for
numbering elements of A.
We can incorporate this technique to TSP problem as well. In
this case, the simplest way is to use a factorial numbering
system in which i-th digit starting from the least signi ﬁcant
one can be any number between 0 and i − 1. In general
ðd
k ¼ d0Þ! /C17 Pk
i¼0 d0 /C1 i!. The opposite transformation can be
done by computing the modulo by consecutive natural numbers.
Then such representation can be transformed to permutation via
Lehmer codes which, starting with the most signi ﬁcant factoradic
digit, takes ( k + 1)-th digit of the sequence (0, 1, … , k). The used
digit is removed and the procedure repeats for next digit. The
taken digits in given order directly encodes a permutation.
Since the procedure described above maps consecutive natural
numbers to routes, we require only dlogðN!Þe qubits, which is
optimal for each N. Since arbitrary pseudo-Boolean function can
be transformed to pseudo-Boolean polynomial, it is as well the
case for f∘g
inv. Hence there exists a diagonal Hamiltonian
representing the same optimization problem. However, in general
such encoding may require exponential number of terms, which
makes it intractable for QAOA. Hence, for such an approach VQE is
at the moment the preferable quantum algorithm. The numbers
of required measurements will in general depend on the choice of
E
pen, however, they can be equal to the length of any route, or
N maxi≠j Wij . By this we can show that the number of measure-
ments is approximately OðNÞ rangeðWÞ, which is signi ﬁcantly
smaller than for any encoding described before.
DISCUSSION
The presented results, summarized in Table 1, show that it is
possible to signi ﬁcantly reduce the number of required qubits at
the cost of having deeper circuits. Since reducing both the depth
and the number of qubits are challenging tasks, we claim that it is
necessary to provide alternative representation allowing trade-
offs between the different measures. Our numerical results hint
that the increase of the depth might not be that signi ﬁcant for
larger system sizes, as one needs fewer levels in the space-
efﬁcient embedded version. Thus, it would be interesting to
investigate how many fewer levels one needs in the space-
efﬁcient encoding scheme.
Note that the approach cannot be applied for general problems.
For example, the state-of-the-art representation of the Max-Cut
problem over a graph of order N requires exactly N qubits. Since
the natural space in general is of order 2
N, it seems unlikely to
further reduce the number of qubits. However, one can expect
Fig. 4 The dependence between the probability of measuring the state in feasible space and the number of levels for Travelling
Salesman Problem. Analysis was done for a 3 cities, b 4 cities, c 5 cities for W ≡ 0, and d 3 cities, e 4 cities, f 5 cities for randomly chosen W.F o r
most cases HOBO and QUBO present similar quality, while HOBO clearly outperforms QUBO approach for random W for 4 cities. Vertical line
denotes the change of optimization method. For 5 cities with random W we were only capable of estimating up to 10 levels applied due to
convergence issues. The area describes the range between the worst and the best cases of the best probabilities over all TSP instances.
A. Glos et al.
5
Published in partnership with The University of New South Wales npj Quantum Information (2022)    39 

===== PAGE 6 =====

similar improvements for other permutation-based problems like
max-k-coloring problem.
On top of that, while arbitrary HOBO can be turned into QUBO
by automatic quadratization techniques, it remains an open
question whether there are simple techniques that reduce the
number of qubits at the cost of additional Pauli terms. This is due
to the fact that quadratization is well-de ﬁned: if H : B
X ! R is a
general pseudo-Boolean function, then quadratic pseudo-Boolean
function H
0 : BX ´ BY ! R is its quadratization iff for all x 2B X
HðxÞ¼ min
y2BY
H0ðx; yÞ: (4)
Note that y does not have any meaning in the context of original
problem H. However, when removing qubits from binary
function, we may not be able to reproduce the original solution.
Thus, such (automatic) procedure requires context of the
problem being solved.
One could consider recent results showing that QAOA with
polynomial depth is exposed to the negative side-effect induced
by the noisy system
33,34. This threatens the possible application of
QAOA not only to this model, but also to the state-of-the-art
model. However, if we want to compare the ef ﬁciency of QAOA
with QUBO against HOBO or mixed encoding, we should take into
account that smaller systems would likely give more faithful
results. This effect is in fact already observed in the current
quantum devices: e.g., when comparing superconducting qubits
and trapped ion technologies, one can note that while for the
former it is much easier to construct larger computers, the latter
technology allows us to run deep quantum algorithms with much
higher ﬁdelity as long as the memory resources are signi ﬁcantly
smaller. Thus, the applicability of our results against the state-of-
the-art model may depend on how the current technologies will
evolve in the nearest future, and it is dif ﬁcult to estimate whether
small-depth large-width computation will be more plausible than
large-depth short-width ones.
Finally, using 2-complete linear swap network presented in
O’Gorman et al.
35 we can implement HOBO on Linear Nearest
Neighbour (LNN) topology with the same depth up to polylog
overhead, by swapping whole registers bt instead of single qubits.
This comes from the fact that swapping two neighboring registers
of size /C24 log N requires only /C24O ðlog NÞ depth. Furthermore, by
using decomposition from Fig. 3a and proper reordering of qubits,
one can implement up to /C24 2 log N-local Pauli operators with only
extra Oðlog NÞ depth. On the other hand, swap network presented
in
35 guarantees only depth proportional to the number of qubits
for QUBO. For this reason for the QUBO formulation considered in
this paper, it gives only OðN
2Þ depth. This in fact is optimal, as one
cannot construct swap network achieving depth N2−ε for any ε >0 .
One can show it as follows: if we take any initial arrangement on
the LNN network for QUBO, then all of the spins which interact
should be with distance N
2−ε. However, all spins presented in the
formulation have to interact with the spins interacting with the
ﬁrst spin (in other words, graph of spin interactions has radius 2
for any node). This would mean that all spins have to be within
distance N
2−ε from the ﬁrst spin, which is not possible since there
are N2 of them. Hence we see that Θ(N2) depth is the best
achievable for TSP. Hence for such LNN topology HOBO depth is
larger only by poly-logarithmic factors, while having signi ﬁcant
reduction on qubits.
METHODS
The analysis of circuits ’depths
Let us begin with HOBO and mixed approaches. According to Eq. ( 2)w e
can split all the terms into those de ﬁned over pairs ðbt ; bt0 Þ for t≠t0. For
pairwise different t0, t1, t2, t3, if we have polynomials de ﬁned over bt0 ; bt1 ,
and bt2 ; bt3 , then we can implement them independently. Using round-
robin schedule, we can implement those
/C16N
2
/C17
polynomials in N − 1( N)
steps for even (odd) N, as it is described in Fig. 2.
Let H be a general Hamiltonian de ﬁned over K bits. If we implemented
each term independently, then it would require PK
k¼1 2i
/C16K
i
/C17
Θð2K KÞ¼
2K K /C0 1 controlled NOTs according to the decomposition presented in
Fig. 3a. Adding single auxiliary qubit and using the decomposition from
Fig. 3b, and ordering terms according to Gray code, we can do it using 2 K
qubits. Following the reasoning from previous paragraph we can apply
only dN
2e Hamiltonians at once. We have an additional cost of dN
2e qubits,
however reducing the depth cost by K ¼ Θðlog NÞ for both mixed and
simple HOBO approaches.
For HHOBO
≠ all terms are formed of pair of spins Zt;k Zt0 ;k . Here we can
again use the Gray code schedule, however each wire in Fig. 3c has a
meaning of the presented pair of spins. This means that each application
of Pauli term will results in 2 new controlled NOTs, instead of a single one
as in Fig. 3d. The situation for mixed formulation is much more
complicated, as there are terms which consist of the mentioned pairs of
spins plus one spin w/o match, hence the application of Gray code is not
straightforward. Hence we did not assume any CNOT simpli ﬁcation.
As far as QUBO is concerned, we have to make separate analysis, since
only 2-local terms are present. Note that 1-local terms Z
ti can be
implemented with circuit of depth 1. Moreover, for each 0 ≤ t < N, terms
{ZtiZtj:0 ≤ i < j < N} can be implemented with a circuit of depth ≈ N using
round-robin schedule. We can similarly implement fZti Zt0 i : 0 /C20 t<t0<Ng,
which implement ﬁrst two addends of HQUBO. For the last addend we have
to implement for each 0 ≤ t < N terms Zt ¼f Zti Ztþ1;j : i ≠ jg. For even N,
note that we can ﬁrst implement them for even t, then for odd t, which
doubles the depth of the circuit for single t. For odd N we have to include
extra layer for t = N − 1, which will only increase the depth by 3/2. Finally,
note that Zt ¼SN/C0 1
k¼0 Zt;k , where each Zt;k ¼f Zti Ztþ1;iþk : 0 /C20 i<Ng can be
implemented with circuit of depth 1. Eventually, the depth of Hamiltonian
H
QUBO is of order Θ(N).
The detailed analysis for each encoding can be found in Supplementary
Methods.
Numerical analysis
Below we describe the optimization algorithm used to generate the result
presented in Fig. 4. We have emulated the quantum evolution and take an
exact expectation energy of the state during the optimization. As a
classical subroutine we used a L-BFGS algorithm implemented in Julia ’s
Table 1. Upperbounds on resources required for various Hamiltonian encodings.
QUBO HQUBO HOBO HHOBO Mixed HMIX Enumerating HVQE
No. of qubits N2 N log N α
C N2/C0 α log NN dlogðN!Þe
No. of terms 2 N3 (C2 − C/2)N3 α
2 N3 log N Exponential
Circuit depth 12 N (4C2 + 3C)N2 2α2CN1þαlog2N Exponential
Circuit volume 12 N3 ð4C2 þ 3CÞN3 log N 2α3N3log3N Exponential
No. of measurements OðN3Þ maxi≠j Wij OðN2Þ maxi≠j Wij OðN3/C0 α log NÞ maxi≠j Wij OðNÞrange ðWÞ
Only leading terms are written, for more exact bounds see Supplementary Methods. The Oð/C1Þ does not depend on the choice of W. We assumed B = 1 and
A1; A2 ¼O ðmaxi≠j Wij Þ. Note that HMIX scales up to poly-logarithmic factor between HQUBO and HHOBO. The constant C ∈ (1, 2) for HOBO and mixed Hamiltonians
depends on α and N. For depth, only terms for even N are present, for odd N terms can be found in the Supplementary Methods.
A. Glos et al.
6
npj Quantum Information (2022)    39 Published in partnership with The University of New South Wales

===== PAGE 7 =====

Optim package 36. Independently of the instance of algorithm, we assume
that the parameters θmix for mixing Hamiltonian could be from the interval
[0, π]. For objective Hamiltonian we assumed the parameter θobj will be
from [0, R]. For both we assume periodic domain, mainly if π + ε or
respectively R + ε was encountered, the parameter was changed to ε,
which changed the hypercube domain to hypertorus.
Let r be the number of levels of the circuit. For r < 5, each run was
started from randomly chosen vector within range of the parameters. For
r ≥ 5, we used a trajectories method similar to the one proposed in
37. First,
we optimized the algorithm for r = 5, as described in previous paragraph.
Then, for each r ≥ 5 we took the optimized parameter vectors θ!ðrÞ
mix , θ!ðrÞ
obj of
length r, and constructed new vectors θ!ðrþ1Þ
mix , θ!ðrþ1Þ
obj of length r + 1b y
copying the last element at the end. We took these vectors as initial points
for r + 1. Therefore, we obtained a trajectory of length 11 (6 for Fig. 4f) of
locally optimal parameter vectors, one for each r ≥ 5.
Sometimes the algorithm has not converged to the local optimum in
reasonable time. We claim that the reason came from periodicity of the
domain, which for general TSP breaks the smoothness of the Hamiltonian
landscape. We only accepted runs for which: for r < 5 the gradient was
below 10
−5; for r ≥ 5, for each parameters vector from the trajectory, the
gradient was supposed to be below 10 −5.
Since the energy values for both QUBO and HOBO are incomparable, we
decided to present the probability of measuring the feasible solution, i.e.
the solution describing a valid route.
Figures a, b, c from Fig. 4 were generated as follows. We took QUBO and
HOBO encodings of TSP with W ≡ 0 for QAOA algorithm. One can consider
it as a Hamiltonian problem on a complete graph. We took A1 = A2 = 1 for
both encodings, and R = π (R = 2π) for QUBO (HOBO). For each r = 1, … ,1 5
we generated 100 locally optimal parameter vectors, and for each r we
chose the maximum probability.
Subﬁgures d,e,f from Fig. 4 were generated as follows. We generated
100 matrices W to be W = X + X⊤, where X is a random matrix with i. i. d.
elements from the uniform distribution over [0, 1]. For each TSP instance
we repeated the procedure as in W ≡ 0 case, however, generating
40 samples for each r. For each TSP instance we chose the maximal
probability of measuring the state in the feasible space. The line describes
the mean of the best probabilities over all TSP instances. The area
describes the range between the worst and the best cases of the best
probabilities over all TSP instances.
The number of measurements
For estimating the number of measurements we applied the Hoeffding ’s
inequality. Let X ¼ 1
M
PM
i¼1 Xi be the mean of i.i.d. random variables such
that Xi ∈ [a, b]. Then
PðjX /C0 EXj/C21 tÞ/C20 2 exp /C0 2Mt2
b /C0 a
/C18/C19
: (5)
In our case X is the energy estimation of the energy samples Xi. Provided
that we expect both probability error and estimation error to be constant,
we require M = Ω(b − a).
The values of a, b depend not only on the cost matrix W, but also on the
form of the encoding and the values of constants A
1, A2, B in Eq. ( 2). For
simplicity, we take the following assumptions when estimating the
samples number. First, w.l.o.g. we assume B = 1. Furthermore, we assumed
C max
i≠j Wij /C20 Ai /C20 C0 maxi≠j Wij where C; C0 do not depend on N and W.
This matches the minimal requirement for QUBO. While various measures
on W could be considered, we presented the results in the form
f ðNÞ maxi6¼j Wi;j , where f does not depend on W. Furthermore, our analysis
for each model is tight in N assuming that max i≠j Wij ; mini≠j Wij ¼ Θð1Þ
independently on N. Note that using this assumption, a /C21 N mini≠j Wij is
valid for any correctly chosen A1, A2.
Furthermore, Hamiltonians H≠ and Hvalid are integer-valued, and the
spectral gap is of constant order. For QUBO, the spectral gap is at most
two, which can be generated by adding super ﬂuous one-bit to any valid
encoding. For HOBO, it can be generated by choosing the same number
for different b
t ; bt0 . Finally, for the mixed approach we can generate
incorrect assignments to slack ξt,i variables. Theoretically, there is no upper-
bound for A1, A2. However, in general it is not encouraged to make them
too large, as classical optimization algorithm may focus too much on
pushing the quantum state to feasible state instead of optimizing over
feasible space. For this reason and to make the presentation of our results
simpler, we assumed that A
i are of order max i≠j Wi;j .
During the optimization, one could expect that the quantum states will
ﬁnally have large, expectedly 1 − o(1) overlap with the feasible space.
Thus, one could expect that the estimated energy will be of typical, and
later close to minimal, route. Thus, for these points one could expect that
OðNÞ rangeðWÞ samples would be enough to estimate the energy
accurately. We agree that it is a valid approach, especially when the
gradient is calculated using ( f(θ
0 + ε) − f(θ0 − ε))/(2ε) formula. However,
recently a huge and justi ﬁed effort has been made on analytical gradient
estimation, which is calculated based on θ parameters that are far from
the current θ0 point38,39. In this scenario, we can no longer assume that
the energy will be of the order of the typical route. Thus we believe that
our approach for number of measurements estimation is justi ﬁed.
The detailed analysis for each encoding can be found in the
Supplementary Methods.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available
at the link https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5638267.
CODE AVAILABILITY
Code and its description used to generate the dataset is available at the link https://
doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5638267.
Received: 21 October 2020; Accepted: 9 March 2022;
REFERENCES
1. Grover, L. K. A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search. In Pro-
ceedings of the twenty-eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing ,
212-219 (ACM Digital Library, 1996).
2. Shor, P. W. Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and discrete
logarithms on a quantum computer. SIAM Rev. 41, 303 –332 (1999).
3. Montanaro, A. Quantum algorithms: an overview. npj Quant. Inf. 2,1 –8 (2016).
4. Jordan, S. Quantum Algorithm Zoo. quantumalgorithmzoo.org/ https://
quantumalgorithmzoo.org/.
5. Arute, F. et al. Quantum supremacy using a programmable superconducting
processor. Nature 574, 505 –510 (2019).
6. Montanaro, A. Quantum-walk speedup of backtracking algorithms. Theory Com-
put. 14,1 –24 (2018).
7. Ambainis, A. et al. Quantum speedups for exponential-time dynamic program-
ming algorithms. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
Discrete Algorithms , 1783-1793 (SIAM, 2019).
8. Peruzzo, A. et al. A variational eigenvalue solver on a photonic quantum pro-
cessor. Nat. Commun. 5, 4213 (2014).
9. McClean, J. R., Romero, J., Babbush, R. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. The theory of variational
hybrid quantum-classical algorithms. New J. Phys. 18, 023023 (2016).
10. Moll, N. et al. Quantum optimization using variational algorithms on near-term
quantum devices. Quant. Sci. Technol. 3, 030503 (2018).
11. Farhi, E., Goldstone, J. & Gutmann, S. A quantum approximate optimization
algorithm. Preprint at http://arXiv.org/abs/1411.4028 (2014).
12. Ostaszewski, M., Grant, E. & Benedetti, M. Structure optimization for para-
meterized quantum circuits. Quantum 5, 391 (2021).
13. Kübler, J. M., Arrasmith, A., Cincio, L. & Coles, P. J. An adaptive optimizer for
measurement-frugal variational algorithms. Quantum 4, 263 (2020).
14. Choi, V. Minor-embedding in adiabatic quantum computation: I. the parameter
setting problem. Quant. Inf. Process. 7, 193 –209 (2008).
15. Choi, V. Minor-embedding in adiabatic quantum computation: Ii. minor-universal
graph design. Quant. Inf. Process. 10, 343 –353 (2011).
16. Morales, M. E., Biamonte, J. & Zimborás, Z. On the universality of the Quantum
Approximate Optimization Algorithm. Quant. Inf. Process. 19,1 –26 (2020).
17. Lloyd, S. Quantum approximate optimization is computationally universal. Pre-
print at http://arXiv.org/abs/1812.11075 (2018).
18. Hastings, M. B. Classical and quantum bounded depth approximation algorithms.
Preprint at http://arXiv.org/abs/1905.07047 (2019).
19. Farhi, E., Gamarnik, D. & Gutmann, S. The quantum approximate optimization
algorithm needs to see the whole graph: Worst case examples. Preprint at http://
arXiv.org/abs/2005.08747 (2020).
20. Had ﬁeld, S. et al. From the quantum approximate optimization algorithm to a
quantum alternating operator ansatz. Algorithms 12, 34 (2019).
A. Glos et al.
7
Published in partnership with The University of New South Wales npj Quantum Information (2022)    39 

===== PAGE 8 =====

21. Akshay, V., Philathong, H., Morales, M. E. & Biamonte, J. D. Reachability de ﬁcits in
quantum approximate optimization. Phy. Rev. Lett. 124, 090504 (2020).
22. Zhu, L. et al. An adaptive quantum approximate optimization algorithm for sol-
ving combinatorial problems on a quantum computer. Preprint at http://arXiv.
org/abs/2005.10258 (2020).
23. Zhao, T., Carleo, G., Stokes, J. & Veerapaneni, S. Natural evolution strategies and
variational Monte Carlo. Mach. Learn. Sci. Technol. 2, 02LT01 (2021).
24. Wierichs, D., Gogolin, C. & Kastoryano, M. Avoiding local minima in variational
quantum eigensolvers with the natural gradient optimizer. Phys. Rev. Res. 2,
043246 (2020).
25. Boros, E. & Gruber, A. On quadratization of pseudo-Boolean functions. In Inter-
national Symposium on Arti ﬁcial Intelligence and Mathematics, ISAIM 2012 (2012).
26. Lucas, A. Ising formulations of many NP problems. Front. Phys. 2, 5 (2014).
27. Anschuetz, E., Olson, J., Aspuru-Guzik, A. & Cao, Y. Variational quantum factoring.
In International Workshop on Quantum Technology and Optimization Problems ,
74–85 (Springer, 2019).
28. Tan, B., Lemonde, M.-A., Thanasilp, S., Tangpanitanon, J. & Angelakis, D. G. Qubit-
efﬁcient encoding schemes for binary optimisation problems. Quantum 5, 454
(2021).
29. Mandal, A., Roy, A., Upadhyay, S. & Ushijima-Mwesigwa, H. Compressed quad-
ratization of higher order binary optimization problems. In Proceedings of the 17th
ACM International Conference on Computing Frontiers , 126 –131 (2020).
30. Sawaya, N. P. et al. Resource-ef ﬁcient digital quantum simulation of d-level systems
for photonic, vibrational, and spin- s Hamiltonians. npj Quant. Inf. 6,1 –13 (2020).
31. Fuchs, F. G., Kolden, H. Ø., Aase, N. H. & Sartor, G. Ef ﬁcient encoding of the
weighted MAX- k-CUT on a quantum computer using QAOA. SN Comput. Sci. 2,
1–14 (2021).
32. Bärtschi, A. & Eidenbenz, S. Grover mixers for QAOA: Shifting complexity from
mixer design to state preparation. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE) ,7 2 –82 (IEEE, 2020).
33. Wang, S. et al. Noise-induced barren plateaus in variational quantum algorithms.
Nat. Commun. 12,1 –11 (2021).
34. Stilck França, D. & García-Patrón, R. Limitations of optimization algorithms on
noisy quantum devices. Nat. Phys. 17, 1221 –1227 (2021).
35. O ’Gorman, B., Huggins, W. J., Rieffel, E. G. & Whaley, K. B. Generalized swap
networks for near-term quantum computing. Preprint at http://arXiv.org/abs/
1905.05118 (2019).
36. Mogensen, P. K. & Riseth, A. N. Optim: a mathematical optimization package for
Julia. J. Open Source Softw. 3, 615 (2018).
37. Zhou, L., Wang, S.-T., Choi, S., Pichler, H. & Lukin, M. D. Quantum approximate
optimization algorithm: Performance, mechanism, and implementation on near-
term devices. Phys. Rev. X 10, 021067 (2020).
38. Schuld, M., Bergholm, V., Gogolin, C., Izaac, J. & Killoran, N. Evaluating analytic
gradients on quantum hardware. Phys. Rev. A 99, 032331 (2019).
39. Sweke, R. et al. Stochastic gradient descent for hybrid quantum-classical opti-
mization. Quantum 4, 314 (2020).
40. Rasmussen, R. V. & Trick, M. A. Round robin scheduling – a survey. Eur. J. Oper. Res.
188, 617 –636 (2008).
41. Seeley, J. T., Richard, M. J. & Love, P. J. The Bravyi-Kitaev transformation for
quantum computation of electronic structure. J. Chem. Phys. 137, 224109 (2012).
42. Nielsen, M. A. & Chuang, I. L. Quantum computation and quantum information.
Phys. Today 54,6 0 –2 (2001).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Colin Campbell and Edward Dahl for the discussions
leading to the realization that the depth of the HOBO and mixed approach can be
made much smaller than stated in previous versions. A.G. has been partially
supported by National Science Center under grant agreements 2019/32/T/ST6/00158,
2019/33/B/ST6/02011, and 2020/37/N/ST6/02220. A.G. would also like to acknowl-
edge START scholarship from the Foundation for Polish Science. A.K. acknowledges
ﬁnancial support by the Foundation for Polish Science through TEAM-NET project
(contract no. POIR.04.04.00-00-17C1/18-00). Z.Z. acknowledges support from NKFIH
through the Quantum Information National Laboratory of Hungary, the Quantum
Technology National Excellence Program (No.2017-1.2.1-NKP-2017-00001), the
Quantum Information National Laboratory program, and Grants No. K124152,
K120569, FK135220, and KH129601. The project „Near-term quantum computers
Challenges, optimal implementations and applications ” under Grant Number
POIR.04.04.00-00-17C1/18-00, is carried out within the Team-Net programme of the
Foundation for Polish Science co- ﬁnanced by the European Union under the
European Regional Development Fund. This research was supported in part by PL-
Grid Infrastructure.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All the authors have equal contribution to the preparation of the paper. A.G.
proposed the main idea, made the analytical investigations presented in
Supplementary Methods and performed the numerical analysis. A.K. prepared the
ﬁgures, studied the problem of effective implementation on quantum computers and
designed and implemented the ﬁrst mixed encoding. Z.Z. proposed and investigated
the second mixed encoding and quanti ﬁed the impact of the paper.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41534-022-00546-y.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Adam Glos.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2022
A. Glos et al.
8
npj Quantum Information (2022)    39 Published in partnership with The University of New South Wales
